Congressional Record UNUM
E PLURIBUS
United States
of America PROCEEDINGS AND DEBATES OF THE 114th
 CONGRESS, SECOND SESSION
? This ‘‘bullet’’ symbol identifies statements or insertions which are not spoken by a Member of the Senate on the floor.
.
S1351
Vol. 162 WASHINGTON, WEDNESDAY, MARCH 9, 2016 No. 38
House of Representatives
The House was not in session today. Its next meeting will be held on Thursday, March 10, 2016, at 11:30 a.m.
Senate
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 9, 2016
The Senate met at 9:30 a.m. and was
called to order by the Honorable RAND
PAUL, a Senator from the Commonwealth of Kentucky.
f
PRAYER
The Chaplain, Dr. Barry C. Black, offered the following prayer:
Let us pray.
O God, our God, we honor Your
Name. You continue to guide our Nation, and we trust the unfolding of
Your prevailing providence. Help us to
effectively tell this generation about
Your mighty works so that Your Name
will be known by those not yet born.
Use us to inspire people to celebrate
Your matchless mercy and Your power
to save. Thank You for keeping Your
word, for extending to us Your daily
blessings, and for picking us up each
time we fall.
Guide your Senators with Your love
today. Be for them a shade by day and
a defense by night. Lord, keep them on
the road that leads to life.
We pray in Your merciful Name.
Amen.
f
PLEDGE OF ALLEGIANCE
The Presiding Officer led the Pledge
of Allegiance, as follows:
I pledge allegiance to the Flag of the
United States of America, and to the Republic for which it stands, one nation under God,
indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.
f
APPOINTMENT OF ACTING
PRESIDENT PRO TEMPORE
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will please read a communication
to the Senate from the President pro
tempore (Mr. HATCH).
The legislative clerk read the following letter:
U.S. SENATE,
PRESIDENT PRO TEMPORE,
Washington, DC, March 9, 2016.
To the Senate:
Under the provisions of rule I, paragraph 3,
of the Standing Rules of the Senate, I hereby
appoint the Honorable RAND PAUL, a Senator
from the Commonwealth of Kentucky, to
perform the duties of the Chair.
ORRIN G. HATCH,
President pro tempore.
Mr. PAUL thereupon assumed the
Chair as Acting President pro tempore.
f
RECOGNITION OF THE MAJORITY
LEADER
The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. The majority leader is recognized.
f
COMPREHENSIVE ADDICTION AND
RECOVERY BILL
Mr. MCCONNELL. Mr. President, the
Senate will soon have a chance to come
together in support of the Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act, a bill
designed to help address the prescription opioid and heroin epidemic that is
spreading across our country.
We have seen the impact this crisis is
having in all 50 States, how it is affecting people of all different ages and
backgrounds. We know that heroin and
prescription opioid addiction devastates communities, destroys families, and claims thousands of lives each
year, but we also know there are steps
we can take here in the Senate that
can help heal our Nation. For instance,
just a few months ago we appropriated
$400 million to opioid-specific programs—which is nearly one-third more
than what the Senate appropriated the
preceding year—and all $400 million of
those funds remain available to be
spent today.
We can take another step forward
now—a big step—with the passage of
this authorization bill. Just listen to
what some officials are saying about
CARA’s potential impact: Northern
Kentucky’s top anti-drug official said
this bill can help ‘‘allow individuals,
families, and communities to heal from
this scourge.’’ The president and CEO
of a nonprofit organization with programs in Kentucky noted that CARA
can ‘‘create lasting impact in Kentucky’’ and ultimately help lead to
more Kentuckians ‘‘receiv[ing] the
treatment they desperately need. A
group that provides overdose prevention training in the Commonwealth
said that CARA can give them a
‘‘stronger foundation to move from
training to action.’’ President Obama’s
own drug czar noted that provisions
like those in CARA are ‘‘critically important to make headway’’ in this epidemic.
The bill before us, with all of its important provisions, is the result of hard
work and leadership from many colleagues on both sides of the aisle. Of
course, there is the lead Republican
sponsor of this bill, the junior Senator
from Ohio, Mr. PORTMAN, who has
worked closely with colleagues in both
parties, such as the junior Senator
from New Hampshire, Ms. AYOTTE, as
VerDate Sep 11 2014 00:16 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00001 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A09MR6.000 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
S1352 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 9, 2016
well as the junior Senator from Rhode
Island and the senior Senator from
Minnesota. There is the chairman of
the Judiciary Committee, Senator
GRASSLEY, who worked to move this
bill quickly out of committee by voice
vote.
I also thank the many Senators who
worked with the bill managers to process the kinds of amendments both sides
agreed would make this bill even better. That includes the senior Senators
from Iowa and California, whose
amendment would aid in targeting illegal drug importation. It includes the
senior Senator from West Virginia,
whose amendment will build upon education and awareness efforts in an effort to underline the dangers of opioid
abuse. It includes the junior Senator
from Pennsylvania, whose amendment
would allow Medicare Advantage and
Part D plans to implement a prescription drug abuse prevention tool, a tool
similar to what is already available
and used in Kentucky in the Medicaid
Program and in private plans.
The bipartisan collaboration we have
seen thus far shows what we can
achieve on behalf of the American people when we work together toward important shared priorities. The passage
of CARA would bring us one step closer
to ending prescription opioid and heroin addiction and overdose, so let’s
keep working together to pass it.
f
RECOGNITION OF THE MINORITY
LEADER
The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. The Democratic leader is recognized.
f
FILLING THE SUPREME COURT
VACANCY
Mr. REID. Mr. President, the Republican leader and I have worked together in leadership capacities in the
Senate for almost 20 years. He has been
the whip and I was the whip. I was majority leader, he was minority leader,
and vice versa. My presentations the
last few weeks do not take away from
the fact that MITCH MCCONNELL and I
are friends. We have worked together
for a long time, and we have done our
best to move the Senate forward. But
that does not take away from my need
as a Senator to pronounce publicly
when he and I disagree. So I want to
make sure the record is reflective of
that.
As each day passes, the Republican
leader continues to transform his caucus into the party of Donald Trump.
That is not good. You can see it in the
Republicans’ rhetoric. The Senators
are using increasingly extreme and disturbing language in defending their unprecedented obstruction of President
Obama’s Supreme Court nominee, who
yet is unnamed.
The assistant Republican leader said
the President’s eventual nominee ‘‘will
bear some resemblance to a pinata.’’
We talked about, in the past, what a pinata is. He is comparing a Supreme
Court nominee to a children’s party
favor that gets smashed repeatedly
with a baseball bat or something similar to a baseball bat. That is nothing
more than a thinly veiled threat from
Senator CORNYN, serving notice on the
coming assault on the President’s
nominee.
We should not forget that we don’t
know who this nominee will be. We
know nothing about this person,
whether it is a man or a woman, educated at Harvard or Stanford or the
University of Utah or the University of
New Mexico. We don’t know. But the
Republican leader doesn’t care who the
eventual nominee is. It appears that is
the case. He doesn’t want his Senators
to care either. All he cares about is appeasing the Trump wing of the party—
which is getting pretty big—and
Trump’s radical followers.
After all, this is the same Republican
leader who yesterday again refused to
distance himself from Donald Trump.
He refused to condemn his hateful campaign for President. Instead, he pledged
to support the Republican nominee. It
is really shocking to see this transformation. Republicans have not always been this irrational and vicious.
Even Senator CORNYN used to know
better. During Justice Alito’s confirmation hearings, the then-junior
Senator from Texas was also talking
about pinatas as he decried personal
attacks on Supreme Court nominees.
Here is what he said:
I’m happy Judge Alito survived these unwarranted attacks. I’m also sorry that his
family had to be subjected to them, as well.
At some point, however, we as a committee
will need to come to terms with our confirmation process. The current regime treats
Supreme Court nominees more like pinatas
than human beings. And that’s something
none of us should be willing to tolerate.
The Republican whip gave this pinata
talk the day the Senate Judiciary
Committee approved the Alito nomination. Now that President Obama is the
one putting forth a Supreme Court
nominee, it seems the assistant Republican leader is willing to tolerate, even
promote, these ‘‘unwarranted attacks’’
he once denounced. Why the change?
The answer is very simple: The senior
Senator from Texas, like every other
member of his caucus, is simply obeying the Republican leader’s orders as
he leads them to become the party of
Trump, the caucus of Trump, the conference of Trump. This is the path the
Republican leader has chosen for his
party—a path of demagoguery and
lapsed constitutional duties, a path
which he forged and which led to the
rise of Donald Trump. I do not understand why so many of my Republican
colleagues are blindly following this
path down a very bumpy road. Where
are the moderate Republicans—however few there may be—who see that
they are being used by the Republican
leader to appease the Trump wing of
the party? Where are the voices of reason from within the Republican caucus
who will take a stand against this unprecedented dereliction of duty?
Keep in mind, a decade ago the Senator from Texas was decrying a Republican nominee being treated like a pinata. Now, fast-forward 10 years, and
he is saying: I am going to make a pinata out of whoever it is, even though
they don’t know who it is.
I know there have to be some moderate Republicans, or Republicans, because outside of this building, there are
Republicans urging their colleagues to
forgo this ludicrous obstruction.
A person I enjoyed working with
right here, a very conservative Senator
from Mississippi, Trent Lott, was the
majority leader, and I worked with him
very closely. He was a conservative, I
repeat, but he was very pragmatic.
Yesterday or the day before, he lamented his party’s handling of the Supreme Court vacancy. Here is what he
said:
I probably would’ve handled it differently.
My attitude, particularly on the Supreme
Court, was that elections do have consequences, sometimes bad, and I tried to lean
toward being supportive of the president’s
nominees, Democrat or Republican.
That is how we should do things
around here. It was the standard that if
a President put forward a nominee and
that person did not have some ethical
problems and was basically qualified,
we would take care of that. There is no
better example of that than Clarence
Thomas. I didn’t vote for Clarence
Thomas. I wish he hadn’t gotten
enough votes. But we did not stop that
matter from going forward. He just
barely made it. He got 52 votes. But
there was no filibuster. He was nominated by a Republican President. The
President liked him. On paper, he was
qualified. He was a graduate of Yale
Law School. But that isn’t how they
are doing things around here anymore.
What Trent Lott said—he is not
alone. Former Republican Senator
from Indiana—someone we all liked a
lot—Dick Lugar is urging Senate Republicans to do the right thing and
honor their constitutional duty. Here
is what he said:
I can understand their reluctance given the
controversy that surrounds all of the debate
that has already occurred. But that is not
sufficient reason to forgo your duty.
What Richard Lugar is saying is: Do
your jobs. You have a constitutional
obligation to do that.
Those are two quotes I just gave from
strong Republican leaders telling Senate Republicans to do their jobs. So
why won’t they? Of the six nominations made to vacancies that have existed during Presidential election years
since 1900—more than 100 years ago—
each of the six has been confirmed by
the Senate. That is what the Senate
has done in the past and should do now.
I say to my friends across the aisle:
Listen to reason. Heed your constitutional duties. Listen to what the American people are saying. They are not
taking a popular stand. It is wrong.
Don’t fall on your sword for Donald
Trump and his kind. Don’t sacrifice
your integrity as a Senator. Stand up
VerDate Sep 11 2014 00:16 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00002 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.001 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
March 9, 2016 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1353
and do the right thing. Promise to give
President Obama’s nominee a meeting,
a hearing, and a vote. That is your job,
so do it.
Mr. President, I see no one on the
floor. I ask that the business of the day
be announced.
f
RESERVATION OF LEADER TIME
The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. Under the previous order, the
leadership time is reserved.
f
MORNING BUSINESS
The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. Under the previous order, the
Senate will be in a period of morning
business for 1 hour, equally divided,
with Senators permitted to speak
therein for up to 10 minutes each, with
the majority controlling the first half
and the Democrats controlling the second half.
Mr. REID. I suggest the absence of a
quorum.
The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. The clerk will call the roll.
The legislative clerk proceeded to
call the roll.
Mr. COTTON. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. Without objection, it is so ordered.
f
FILLING THE SUPREME COURT
VACANCY
Mr. COTTON. Mr. President, there is
a vacancy on the Supreme Court, and
this Chamber and the American people
must fully understand what is at stake
in choosing the person to fill that vacancy. For a generation, Justice Nino
Scalia was the conservative heart of
the Supreme Court. Whoever takes his
seat will not replace him because there
is no replacement, but his passing has
the potential to dramatically shift the
delicate balance of the Court. Should
Justice Scalia be replaced by a philosophically liberal Justice, the implications for the rights of Americans and
the direction of our Nation would be
profound.
A liberal Justice may mean that the
individual right to keep and bear arms
will be nullified and laws that deprive
Americans of the means to protect
themselves and their families will proliferate. A liberal Justice may mean
that the President’s extraconstitutional Executive order to grant amnesty to
illegal immigrants will be upheld,
trampling the separation of powers and
the will of the American people. A liberal Justice may mean that President
Obama’s plan to destroy America’s coal
industry will survive, destroying thousands of jobs and steady income for
American families.
A liberal Justice may mean that the
government will be empowered to force
people of faith to violate their deeply
held beliefs to subsidize abortifacients
they abhor, and these are only the
issues we can foresee. Novel issues that
strike at the core of our constitutional
order will continue to arise and how
they are settled will hinge greatly on
the next Justice. Because so much depends on who the next Justice is, we
cannot rush into this decision. Because
the law may take such a dramatic
turn, the Members of this Chamber
must first get the input of the American people on what the direction of
our country should be, and because the
next Justice will guide American law
for the next generation, the Senate
should not subordinate our constitutional responsibility to advise and consent on a Supreme Court nominee to a
lameduck President with a stale mandate.
This is the way forward that the majority leader and Chairman GRASSLEY
have charted, and it is the right one.
After all, we have an election in November. In a few short months, we will
have a new President and new Senators
who can consider the next Justice with
the full faith of the American people.
Why would we cut off the national
debate about this next Justice? Why
would we squelch the voice of the people? Why would we deny the voters a
chance to weigh in on the makeup of
the Supreme Court? There is absolutely no reason to do so or at least no
principled reason to do so. That is why
no Congress in our history has confirmed a Supreme Court nominee of a
lameduck President of either party for
a vacancy that arose in an election
year.
Abiding by this practice this year is
even more pressing. Some of my Democratic colleagues argue that the American people have already weighed in on
the Supreme Court by reelecting President Obama in 2012, but I will remind
those who make this argument that
the Constitution requires two institutions, the President and the Senate, to
agree upon a new Justice, and in 2014
the voters overwhelmingly chose to
send Republicans to the Senate, making clear their dissatisfaction with this
President’s cavalier attitude toward
the Constitution and his duty to execute the laws as written. If the 2014
election meant anything, it meant that
Americans do not want this President
to determine alone the course of American law for a generation in the Supreme Court. When Arkansas elected
me in 2014 to represent them, they sent
me to Washington with the mandate to
act as a check on the President, and I
will carry out that mandate.
Many of my Democratic colleagues
have come to this floor to demand that
the Senate’s longstanding practice of
declining to confirm Supreme Court
Justices in an election year be discarded and a nominee considered right
away. Perhaps the most impassioned of
these pleas come from the senior Senator from Nevada; that the minority
leader would wish to discard a longstanding practice of the Senate—particularly one related to the judicial
nominations—is not a surprise. He was,
of course, the person in 2013 who detonated the so-called nuclear option, discarding the 60-vote threshold for appellate and district court judicial nominees that existed in this Chamber for
200 years. He did so in order to steamroll the institutional rights of the minority party and pack the lower courts
with as many liberal Obama nominees
as possible.
In terms of dignity and public esteem, such as he had, that ill-considered move cost the minority leader
dearly. He could only exercise the nuclear option if he flip-flopped on his
prior vehement opposition to it. In
2005, the minority leader stood steadfastly against the nuclear option when
it served his political interests. He
called the nuclear option wrong, illegal, and even un-American. He was—to
adapt a familiar saying—against the
nuclear option before he was for it.
In the current debate over filling
Justice Scalia’s seat, we are seeing the
minority leader perform a similarly
brazen flip-flop, not that we should be
surprised by that. Today the minority
leader claimed that the Constitution
compels the Senate to immediately
take up any nominee President Obama
sends our way, but 10 years ago, again,
he sang a much different tune. The minority leader came to this very same
floor to speak passionately in defense
of the constitutional prerogative of the
Senate to defer a vote on the President’s Supreme Court pick. He forcefully stated that nowhere in the Constitution does it say the Senate has a
duty to give Presidential nominees an
up-or-down vote. It says appointments
shall be made with the advice and consent of the Senate, and that is very different than saying that every nominee
receives a vote.
What has changed in the 10 years
since the minority leader uttered those
words? Well, of course, merely the politics of the situation.
I ask, if the current President were a
Republican, would the minority leader
be taking the position he is today?
If the current President were not a
fellow Democrat, would the minority
leader still be inclined to trash the
constitutional prerogatives of the Senate and abandon its longstanding customs?
In light of what you might call the
diversity of the minority leader’s views
over time, I think it is understandable
that questions have been raised about
the sincerity of his position. In the
quiet moments following the rambling
jeremiads that the minority leader directs at Republicans on the Senate
floor, I think my colleagues might be
forgiven if they entertain the thought
that the principled ground on which he
claims to stand is slightly less than
firm.
In the coming months, there is much
work for Congress to do. We must pass
a bill to fund and rebuild our military.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:04 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00003 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.003 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
S1354 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 9, 2016
We must continue to improve the conditions for wage growth and the creation of new jobs. We must conduct
stringent oversight to rein in the excesses of the President on a quixotic
pursuit of a legacy, but with regard to
a Supreme Court nomination, the only
task for this Senate is to wait passionately and listen to the American people.
I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The ACTING PRESIDENT pro tempore. The clerk will call the roll.
The legislative clerk proceeded to
call the roll.
Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. COTTON). Without objection, it is so ordered.
f
MOBILE NOW ACT
Mr. THUNE. Mr. President, over the
last 20 years we have seen incredible
advancements in computing, telecommunications, and information
technology. The United States has led
the world in this innovation thanks to
our brilliant entrepreneurs, scientists,
world-class universities, massive private sector capital investment, a culture that rewards risk-taking, and a favorable regulatory environment, but
increasingly our lead in innovation is
threatened as American businesses are
forced to contend with an ever-growing
number of outdated laws and regulations. While our businesses have often
managed to succeed anyway, American
industries deserve better from our government.
Congress has a responsibility to ensure that our statutes and regulations
are appropriately and narrowly tailored for today’s economy and for the
future. My Commerce Committee colleagues and I have been eager to do our
part in ensuring our Nation’s communications laws keep pace with innovation. Last week, we unanimously
passed the bipartisan MOBILE NOW
Act, which I introduced, along with the
committee’s ranking member Senator
BILL NELSON. This legislation will give
a boost to American innovators who
are looking to make the next generation of wireless technology, known as
5G, a reality.
Mr. President, 5G wireless will obviously mean things like faster movie
downloads and more advanced
smartphones, and it will also mean
massive leaps forward in areas like
technology, entertainment, public safety, and health care, as well as other
economic benefits that will make
American lives better.
One of the best examples I have heard
came from former FCC Commissioner
Meredith Attwell Baker. She pointed
out that right now a Smart Car communicating with 4G wireless technology takes 41/2 feet to brake in response to an obstacle. By contrast, a
Smart car with 5G technology would
travel only 1 inch before braking,
which could be the difference between
life and death. In order to make 5G
wireless technology a reality, we have
to put the right policies in place. Policies that maximize the efficiency of
the airwaves that transmit wireless
broadband signals and the bands of
electromagnetic spectrum that make
up our Nation’s airwaves are in limited
supply. While we can’t make more airwaves to carry additional spectrum, we
can make changes to how they are used
and who uses them in order to improve
efficiency and to do more of what we
have.
The MOBILE NOW Act will require
the government to make at least 255
megahertz of spectrum available for
private sector broadband use by the
year 2020. That is a lot of spectrum, but
MOBILE NOW doesn’t stop there. The
bill also directs government to assess
more than 12,000 megahertz of
superhigh frequency spectrum for wireless broadband suitability. For technical reasons, that spectrum has seen
only limited use to date, but as new
technologies come online in the next
few years, this spectrum will become
increasingly viable.
Indeed, most people expect that these
superhigh bands will become critical
for our 5G future. Making spectrum
available is important, but freeing up
spectrum does not help our digital
economy unless and until we put it to
good use. This is why several of MOBILE NOW’s provisions focus on speeding up the deployment of the communications facilities at the heart of our
Nation’s broadband networks. One way
to do that is by putting a shot clock on
Federal agencies to force them to
make speedy decisions on companies’
applications to place wireless facilities
on Federal property. This is critical for
rural States like South Dakota and Nevada where placing wireless facilities
on Federal lands could bring more
high-speed Internet service to underserved communities.
The MOBILE NOW Act is an example
of what is possible when Members put
aside their partisan differences and
work together to come up with commonsense proposals to spur economic
growth. In addition to the provisions
Senator NELSON and I wrote, MOBILE
NOW also includes all or part of six
other bills which represent the work of
Senators BOOKER, DAINES, FISCHER,
GARDNER, KLOBUCHAR, MANCHIN,
MORAN, RUBIO, SCHATZ, and UDALL. We
also adopted important amendments
from Senators HELLER and PETERS.
Even the chairman and ranking member of the Senate Environment and
Public Works Committee—Senator
INHOFE, as well as a longtime former
member of the Commerce Committee,
Senator BOXER—made key contributions to the bill’s ‘‘dig once’’ section.
The MOBILE NOW Act would not
have been possible without the collaboration of these Senators. So it is my
hope that this spirit of bipartisanship
will also carry over to the Commerce
Committee’s efforts to reauthorize the
Federal Communications Commission.
Compared to other Federal agencies,
the FCC is relatively small. But as the
regulator of the communications and
technology industries, both of which
are central to America’s modern economy, the Commission has significant
influence over the direction of our
country.
Given the importance of the FCC, my
colleagues might be surprised to learn
that Congress has not reauthorized it
in more than a quarter of a century.
You have to go back to 1990 to find the
last time that the FCC, or the Federal
Communications Commission, was reauthorized.
The work of the FCC has continued
during that period, of course, but reauthorizing this agency every 2 years ensures that Congress will be able to
make sure that the FCC has all the
tools it needs to keep up with our rapidly changing digital landscape. Some
26 years ago—I think it is safe to say—
none of us in this Chamber knew anything about the Web, let alone about
smartphones or streaming videos.
Since then, the communications
landscape has been fundamentally
transformed by digital technology, mobile services, and the Internet. Yet the
FCC in that entire time has gone unauthorized, making it the oldest expired
authorization in the Commerce Committee’s broad jurisdiction. I hope we
can change that.
On Monday I introduced the FCC Reauthorization Act of 2016, which includes a handful of noncontroversial,
good-government reforms to go with a
2-year reauthorization window. By restarting the FCC’s regular authorization cycle, the bill will ensure that
necessary congressional oversight of
the FCC’s budget and procedures occur
routinely.
As indicated by the FCC Commissioners themselves at our oversight
hearing last week, a consistent legislative reauthorization process will
produce a more responsible and a more
productive relationship between Congress and the Commission. This will result in better outcomes for both consumers and the rapidly growing
broadband-based economy.
Telecom policy was once considered
to be one of the least partisan issues in
Congress. While the campaign for net
neutrality has certainly changed the
political playing field over the last decade, I believe there is still a lot of
room for bipartisanship on tech and
telecommunications issues. The MOBILE NOW Act and the FCC Reauthorization Act are two bills that can make
a real difference. I look forward to
working with colleagues on the Commerce Committee and in the full Senate to pass both of these bills in the
coming months.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Missouri.
Mr. BLUNT. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent to speak for up to
15 minutes.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:04 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00004 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.004 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
March 9, 2016 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1355
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
f
COMPREHENSIVE ADDICTION AND
RECOVERY BILL
Mr. BLUNT. Mr. President, today the
Senate is taking a second step to deal
with a public health crisis that is destroying lives and damaging communities across the Nation, the epidemic
of opioid and heroin abuse. Step 1 late
last year was to reduce spending in
other programs and increase the dollars available to deal with this addiction.
An estimated 1.9 million American
adults have an opioid-use addiction or
disorder related to prescription drug
pain relievers. Another 500,860 have an
opioid-use disorder related to heroin.
Some 2.5 million Americans are dealing
with this problem. Our Nation’s veterans are particularly at risk for developing a dependency on opioids. A study
published in 2014 found a high prevalence of chronic pain among veterans
because of their service. The chronic
pain among veterans was 44 percent
compared to 26 percent in the general
public.
There was a higher prevalence of
opioid use, at 15.1 percent, in the U.S.
military after a combat deployment,
after possible injuries in training or injuries from an IED attack, compared to
just 4 percent in the general public. In
2014, more than 1,000 Missourians died
from an opioid overdose. In St. Louis
alone, deaths related to opioid abuse
have increased nearly three times since
2007.
Member after member has come to
the floor, just as they came to me last
year as the chairman of the funding
committee for health and human services and explained what a problem this
is in their State. The majority leader
made a point to me the other day that
in Kentucky more people died last year
from drug overdoses than died from car
accidents.
According to the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, 4 people every
day die from an overdose of opioid pain
relievers, and 78 people die every day
from a combination of pain reliever
overdoses or heroin overdose.
Many times those prescription
opioids have been the pathway to heroin. Deaths from prescription opioids
have quadrupled in the past 14 years.
These are stunning statistics. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
has rightly labeled this an ‘‘epidemic.’’
This should get a good vote on the Senate floor today or tomorrow. But just
because it gets a good vote, it does not
mean it was not an important debate
to have.
Just because it gets a good vote and
is now better funded than it has been
in the past, that does not mean the
Senate and the House don’t need to
weigh in and say: Here is more specific
ability to deal with these problems in
new ways. The good news is that addiction is a treatable disease. Those who
receive treatment can recover and go
on to lead full, healthy, and productive
lives.
In Missouri 72 percent of the individuals who had gone through our State’s
opioid treatment program in random
tests test drug-free. The problem with
addiction is that only about 10 percent
of individuals who are battling drug addiction receive treatment. That is why
I am proud to be a cosponsor of this
bill. That is why it is important that
we commit ourselves to win the fight
against addiction.
We need to make sure that all of the
stakeholders are involved. As to first
responders, if you are a first responder
attached to a fire department, for instance, the odds are that you are going
to respond to three times as many drug
overdoses as you do to fires. So whether it is first responders, paramedics, or
the law enforcement community, we
need to use all of our resources to try
to be sure that we are doing what needs
to be done here.
The Comprehensive Addiction and
Recovery Act that we are debating provides grants from multiple government
agencies to encourage State and local
communities to pursue strategies that
we know work. The only thing you
have to do is be sure and implement
those strategies.
The bill expands the educational efforts to understand addiction as a
chronic illness. That promotes treatment and recovery and prevents opioid
abuse from going forward. The bill also
expands resources to identify and to
treat the incarcerated population suffering from addiction disorders with
evidence-based treatment.
Finally, it expands disposal sites for
unwanted prescription medications to
help them out of the hands of children
and adolescents. Way too many unused
painkillers are still in people’s medicine cabinets or their dresser drawer,
waiting for somebody else to find them
and, once they know they are there, to
find them again.
This bill represents a strong bipartisan effort to address this epidemic. I
filed two amendments that I think will
improve the bill. I hope to see them in
the managers’ package. The first
amendment will just simply expand the
efforts that we have already made in a
bill that Senator STABENOW and I introduced a couple of years ago and that
got a significant pilot project in the
Excellence in Mental Health Act.
What that does is to provide 24-hour
access for people living with behavioral
health issues—with mental health
issues. That would include substance
abuse disorder. Excellence in Mental
Health creates a demonstration program that really just simply, in the
right kind of facilities, requires that
mental health is dealt with like all
other health—that behavioral health is
dealt with like all other health.
When we started that debate, there
was a belief that no more than 20
States would implement Excellence in
Mental Health if every State in the
country were allowed to do it if they
wanted to. We now have 24 States that
have applied to be one of the eight
State pilots. The administration said:
Why don’t we increase the 8 States to
14 States? We have an amendment to
this bill that would say: Let’s go ahead
and increase the 14 States to all 24
States, because not only is this the
right thing to do but what these States
will find out is that when you deal with
mental health like all other health,
you probably save money because the
other health issues that people with behavioral health issues have are so
much more easily dealt with.
It has been long said that we have
really turned over, in an outrageous
way, the mental health obligations of
our society to the local police departments and the emergency rooms. That
is no way to do this. It is no way to
solve this problem. We are about 50
years behind. We are beginning now to
catch up in the ways we should.
I also filed an amendment to authorize the Department of Health and
Human Services to use telehealth to
allow this program to work more effectively, to allow telehealth to be one of
the specifically reimbursable opportunities here.
According to the Centers for Disease
Control, individuals in rural communities are more likely—not as likely,
not less likely, but more likely—to
overdose on prescription painkillers
than people in the cities, people in
urban areas. In fact, death rates from
overdoses in rural areas now greatly
outpace the rate in large metropolitan
areas, which historically had higher
rates.
So what do you do to connect those
individuals with the kind of help they
might need on a basis that they can
turn to that help when they need to?
One way to do that, certainly, is telehealth treatment options. Telehealth
allows individuals in rural or medically
underserved areas—many of whom just
simply don’t have other treatment options—to receive the care they need, to
receive the attention their issue needs
remotely.
Additionally, telehealth can be an
important component in ensuring that
those patients receiving treatment for
pain management use opioids effectively and appropriately and don’t get
started down the wrong path and the
wrong way.
In July 2014, the Journal of the
American Medical Association published a study that followed patients
who reported moderate to intense
chronic musculoskeletal pain. Of the
250 patients in the study, half received
the normal standard of care and half
received a year of telephone monitoring in addition to normal care.
Patients who were monitored via
telehealth were twice as likely to report less pain after 12 months, having
someone to talk to or being able to ask
a question about whether they should
increase the medicine because their
pain was worse that day. Researchers
VerDate Sep 11 2014 00:16 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00005 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.006 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
S1356 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 9, 2016
have clearly noted that fewer telehealth patients started taking escalated doses of opioids than people who
were simply taking medicine on their
own. Telehealth holds promise in lots
of areas. I believe this happens to be
one of them. As chairman of the Labor,
Health and Human Services Appropriations Subcommittee, I was proud to see
us increase funding at a 284-percent increase. I will say again that we did
that by cutting funding in other areas.
One of the things the government has
to start doing is to truly prioritize. If
everything is a priority, nothing is a
priority.
Today, with this piece of legislation,
the Senate is telling our friends on the
other side of the Capitol and around
the country that this is an epidemic we
intend to deal with. I look forward to
the continuation of this debate, the
end of this debate, and passing this
bill.
Thank you.
Mr. President, I suggest the absence
of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
proceeded to call the roll.
Mr. NELSON. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
f
FREEDOM FOR BOB LEVINSON
Mr. NELSON. Mr. President, I wish
to speak about Bob Levinson, a retired
FBI agent who 9 years ago today disappeared in Iran. He was on the tourist
island of Kish. It is a little island off
the coast of Iran, and it is Iranian territory. It is in the Persian Gulf. It is
just a few minutes’ flight from Dubai.
Bob Levinson was there. There is conflicting information, but in the process
of checking out from his hotel and getting into a cab and going to the airport
to return—I think to Dubai—he disappeared 9 years ago today.
There is a lot of mystery surrounding
the disappearance, and there is a lot of
mystery surrounding what has happened ever since. There is a mystery as
to why the FBI, shortly after his disappearance, was somewhat lackadaisical about pursuing it. It is a mystery
as to why the CIA was not coordinating
with the FBI in pursuing vigorously
the disappearance of Bob. There is no
mystery surrounding the fact that, finally, the two agencies got their act
together and started to vigorously pursue the disappearance of Bob Levinson.
I wish to give great credit to the agency, since they tried to get to the bottom of it, but that has led us nowhere,
and here we are 9 years later.
It is particularly troubling to all of
us, including all of our negotiating
team for the Iranian nuclear agreement, because at every meeting, both
high level and low level, at the direction of our Secretary of State, first
Hillary Clinton and then John Kerry,
over and over it was brought up to the
Iranian Government. It is frustrating
for this Senator, being the Senator
from Florida where a wife and seven
children are left behind, and for Christine Levinson, whom I have met with
many times, as well as her sons and
daughters and most recently both
Christine and her son, as they plead for
help, for just any information.
About 5 years ago there was proof of
life, and it was a video, and Bob was
looking very gaunt. He had been gone
several years at this point. He was
pleading: Don’t forget him. Sometime
after that, but within a year, the last
proof of life was a photograph showing
an even more emaciated Bob with a
huge beard and unkempt hair. Again,
the picture says all we need to know.
Why is he being left behind? Here, 9
years later, supposedly we don’t know
anything.
This Senator, on behalf of Christine
and her family, went years ago to the
Iranian mission at the United Nations—the only place that Iran had an
ambassador here in the United States,
since we do not have diplomatic relations—and made the case on humanitarian grounds. That case has been
made over and over and over again, including directly with Foreign Minister
Zarif and the new Iranian Ambassador
last September, in a meeting of a handful of Senators on behalf of all of those
who have been kept by Iran. Subsequently, some have been released, including the fellow from Michigan, the
former marine, and so forth, whom we
know about—but nothing about Bob
Levinson.
Of course, the Government of Iran always says: We don’t know anything
about it. Oh, we thought he was in
Pakistan.
Those are always the answers. But he
disappeared in Iran, and with the very
strict state-controlled Iranian security
apparatus, obviously, they know what
happened. Certainly, 9 years later, they
should know what happened or at least
have the capacity to be able to find out
what happened to Bob Levinson. The
rest of us keep searching in every possible way.
A couple of years ago it became apparent to this Senator that the Associated Press was about to publish a story
talking about Bob Levinson’s clandestine activities. This Senator called the
executive editor and pled that they not
publish the story, that they do what
the responsible New York Times had
done. New York Times investigative reporter Barry Meier sat on the story for
over 3 years, knowing that if the story
about clandestine activities were published, it could jeopardize Bob’s life. To
no avail, the Associated Press executive editor said to this Senator: Well,
they already know this. Despite my
pleading to them, the answer was no,
and they went ahead and published the
article. I vigorously disagreed with the
Associated Press’s conclusions, and I
think that jeopardized Bob’s wherewithal as well as his safety.
Here we are, several years later, 9
years after the apparent disappearance,
and still there is nothing about Bob
Levinson. So it is the conclusion of
this Senator that if the Government of
Iran—namely, President Ruhani, as
told to us by his Foreign Minister
Zarif—knows nothing about it, well,
somebody in Iran does. Maybe that
tells us something about Iranian society and the Iranian Government—that
there are these different power centers,
one being the Revolutionary Guard and
another the exclusive Quds Force. But
there is one person that is over all of
this in Iran, and that is the Supreme
Leader, and he should know. All the
pleas that have been made on the basis
of a humanitarian plea for a family—a
wife and seven children—thus far have
been ignored.
This brings us to the next point. According to New York Times investigative reporter Barry Meier, a meeting
took place in 2011 in Paris in the Iranian Embassy with the Iranian Ambassador by a group of private American
citizens who were doing what they
could to facilitate the location of Bob
or any information about Bob, and the
Iranian Ambassador told them that,
yes, Iran had Bob Levinson. This is according to a story published in the New
York Times by Barry Meier a few
months ago.
This Senator called Barry Meier and
asked: ‘‘Are you sure of your facts?’’
And he said yes. This Senator then
called one of the people that was associated with this audience of private
citizens, and that person, when I met
with him, confirmed that what the New
York Times had published was accurate and true, and that, in fact, the FBI
had been called and the FBI had met
with representatives of the Iranian
Embassy in Paris right across the
street from the Embassy in a cafe in
Paris.
This Senator called the former Deputy Director of the FBI—a man of impeccable reputation—Sean Joyce, who
before he was Deputy Director had
spearheaded the efforts on trying to
find Bob Levinson and continued that
in his new role as the No. 2 in the FBI.
Just last week this Senator talked to
Sean Joyce, and he said that he didn’t
know anything about this. Well, if an
investigative reporter has found out
this information and it has been confirmed by people who were there or
knew of that meeting and, at the time
in 2011, the top guy in the FBI who is
spearheading the efforts to try to get
Bob Levinson, a former FBI agent,
doesn’t know about it, what does this
suggest? It suggests that there is a
huge disconnect in the FBI, which
leads this Senator, who has been on
this case for 9 years on behalf of a
grieving wife and seven children, to
wonder what in the world is going on.
Until this turmoil is sorted out, the
bottom line is that we want Bob
Levinson home with his family for humanitarian reasons. I know John Kerry
is doing all he can, but we have to find
VerDate Sep 11 2014 00:16 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00006 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.007 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
March 9, 2016 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1357
another way to get to the Supreme
Leader. Maybe it is through some of
these private contacts. Why has that
not been coordinated? I know the
White House is involved in this, but do
they know about that 2011 meeting? If
FBI agents were there on the case, why
was the White House not informed
along with the leadership of the FBI?
Something is terribly amiss, and we
need to get to the bottom of it.
Sadly, on this ninth year of Bob
Levinson’s disappearance, a patriotic
American who—poof—on the way to
the airport disappeared from Kish Island, Iran—sadly, 9 years later, there is
no information about bringing Bob
Levinson home.
To the President of the United
States, the Secretary of State, the
head of the FBI, the head of all of our
alphabet agencies: It is time to get the
information about Bob and bring him
home.
Mr. President, I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
proceeded to call the roll.
Mr. LANKFORD. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
ROUNDS). Without objection, it is so ordered.
f
CONCLUSION OF MORNING
BUSINESS
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Morning
business is closed.
f
COMPREHENSIVE ADDICTION AND
RECOVERY ACT OF 2015
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Under
the previous order, the Senate will resume consideration of S. 524, which the
clerk will report.
The legislative clerk read as follows:
A bill (S. 524) to authorize the Attorney
General to award grants to address the national epidemics of prescription opioid abuse
and heroin use.
Pending:
Grassley amendment No. 3378, in the nature of a substitute.
Grassley (for Donnelly/Capito) modified
amendment No. 3374 (to amendment No.
3378), to provide follow-up services to individuals who have received opioid overdose
reversal drugs.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Under
the previous order, the time until 12
noon will be equally divided between
the two managers or their designees.
The Senator from Oklahoma.
REMEMBERING JUSTICE SCALIA
Mr. LANKFORD. Mr. President, on
February 13, 2016, the Supreme Court
lost one of its Justices, our Nation lost
a true legal giant.
Justice Scalia was described by colleagues as ‘‘extraordinary,’’ ‘‘treasured,’’ and ‘‘a stylistic genius.’’ Beyond
his unwavering dedication to upholding
the originalist viewpoint of the Constitution, Justice Scalia was also
wholeheartedly committed to his family. He was a husband, father of 9, and
grandfather to 36 grandchildren.
His son Paul said of him during his
homily:
God blessed Dad with a love for his family.
. . . He was the father that God gave us for
the great adventure of family life. . . . He
loved us, and sought to show that love. And
sought to share the blessing of the faith he
treasured. And he gave us one another, to
have each other for support. That’s the
greatest wealth parents can bestow, and
right now we are particularly grateful for it.
Justice Antonin Scalia was nominated to the Supreme Court in 1986 by
President Reagan and was confirmed
by the Senate in a unanimous vote.
While his time on the Court often led
to some criticism of his legal opinions
and his very colorful dissents, he remained respected by his colleagues,
even those of the opposite end of the
judicial spectrum. This is a sign of true
character—to have an open, honest debate about a particular issue while respecting the individual person holding
an opinion different from your own.
Justice Scalia said:
I attack ideas. I don’t attack people. And
some very good people have some very bad
ideas. And if you can’t separate the two, you
gotta get another day job.
The sentiment was best portrayed
through his friendship with Justice
Ginsburg. As one of his friends, she
said:
We are different, but we are one. Different
in our interpretation of written texts. One in
our reverence for the Constitution and the
institution we serve. From our years together on the D.C. Circuit, we were best buddies. We disagreed now and then, but when I
wrote for the Court and received a Scalia dissent, the opinion ultimately released was notably better than my initial circulation.
Justice Scalia was known for his wit
and his sarcasm in his writings, famously referring to legal interpretations of his colleagues as ‘‘jiggerypokery,’’ ‘‘pure applesauce,’’ and ‘‘a
ghoul in a late horror movie.’’ Yet it
was these same criticisms that Justice
Ginsburg said nailed the weak spots in
her opinions and gave her what she
needed to strengthen her writings.
Justice Scalia represented a consistent, constitutional voice on the Supreme Court. Just as the Constitution
is the pillar of our legal system, so too
is his affirmation to this foundational
document of our Nation. He said:
It is an enduring Constitution that I want
to defend. . . . It’s what did the words mean
to the people who ratified the Bill of Rights
or who ratified the Constitution, as opposed
to what people today would like.
Justice Kennedy said:
In years to come any history of the Supreme Court will, and must, recount the wisdom, scholarship, and technical brilliance
that Justice Scalia brought to the Court. His
insistence on demanding standards shaped
the work of the Court in its private discussions, its oral arguments, and its written
opinions. Yet these historic achievements
are all the more impressive and compelling
because the foundations of Justice Scalia’s
jurisprudence, the driving force in all his
work, and his powerful personality were
shaped by an unyielding commitment to the
Constitution of the United States and to the
highest ethical and moral standards.
FILLING THE SUPREME COURT VACANCY
Mr. President, with Justice Scalia’s
passing, we have a vacancy on the
Court to fill.
The question is, When?
I would submit, with only months
left until the Presidential election,
that we should let the people decide.
I have heard over and over for the
past 7 years that elections have consequences, but apparently some people
seem to only think elections have consequences on Presidential elections.
The American people elected a brand
new Senate in 2014 because of their incredible frustration with the operation
of the previous Senate and because of
the direction that we are now heading
under this President.
I have heard this argument for years:
The President should be able to do
what he wants. He is the President. But
may I remind everyone of a document
in our National Archives called the
U.S. Constitution, which gives divided
power to our Nation. The President is
not over the Senate, not over the
House, and not over the Supreme
Court.
Hyperbole of this has been overwhelming to me in the debate of the
past few weeks. I have heard that unless we replace Justice Scalia right
now, we will ‘‘shut down the court.’’ I
have heard on this floor people say
that if we don’t replace Justice Scalia
immediately, it is ‘‘dangerous,’’ it is
‘‘unprecedented,’’ it is unheard of. I
have heard: ‘‘Do your job’’—a failure to
do your duty. I even heard one Senator
say: ‘‘The Constitution says the President shall appoint and the Senate shall
consent.’’
Well, let me show you article II, section 2 of the Constitution where that
comes up. It says that the President
‘‘shall have Power, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, to
make Treaties, provided two thirds of
the Senators present concur; and he
shall nominate’’—the President shall
nominate. That is his constitutional
responsibility. But it is not the constitutional responsibility—it never
says the Senate shall give consent to
the President. Why? Because the Constitution gives the role of selecting a
Supreme Court nominee in a 50–50 responsibility between the Senate and
the President of the United States.
The President shall nominate; that is
his responsibility. But that only moves
forward with the advice and consent of
the Senate. There is no ‘‘shall give consent.’’ There is no requirement how it
moves.
In fact, Alexander Hamilton in The
Federalist Papers, on this very issue,
said that the ‘‘ordinary power of appointment is confided to the President
and Senate jointly.’’
This is a 50–50 agreement. What we
are facing right now are incredible attacks on the chairman of the Judiciary
VerDate Sep 11 2014 00:16 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00007 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.010 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
S1358 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 9, 2016
Committee because he dares to do what
Vice President BIDEN, Senator SCHUMER, and Senator REID recommended
years ago. I even heard that we
shouldn’t listen to the words of Vice
President BIDEN. I would understand
why people would say that, because
when you go back to Vice President
BIDEN’s words, when he was a Senator
and chairman of the Judiciary Committee, in the same spot Chairman
GRASSLEY is in now, this is what, at
that time, Senator BIDEN said. Senator
BIDEN, chairman of the Judiciary Committee, arguing on this same issue,
said: ‘‘Arguing from constitutional history and Senate precedent, I want to
address one question and one question
only: What are the rights and duties of
the Senate in considering nominees to
the Supreme Court?’’
This is from Vice President BIDEN—
then Senator BIDEN:
Some argue that the Senate should defer
to the President in the selection process.
They argue that any nominee who meets the
narrow standards of legal distinction, high
moral character, and judicial temperament
is entitled to be confirmed in the Senate
without further question. . . . Apparently,
there are some in this body and outside this
body who share that view.
I stand here today to argue that opposite
proposition.
This is from Vice President BIDEN. He
stated at that time:
We have quashed the myth that the Senate
must defer to a President’s choice of a Supreme Court Justice, the men and women at
the apex of the independent third branch of
Government.
Can our Supreme Court nomination and
confirmation process, so wracked by discord
and bitterness, be repaired in a Presidential
election year?
Vice President BIDEN, as Senator
BIDEN, said:
History teaches us that this is extremely
unlikely. Some of our Nation’s most bitter
and heated confirmation fights have come in
Presidential election years.
The Senate too, Mr. President, must consider how it would respond to a Supreme
Court vacancy that would occur in the full
throes of an election year.
Vice President BIDEN at that time
said this:
It is my view that if the President goes the
way of Presidents Fillmore and Johnson and
presses an election-year nomination, the
Senate Judiciary Committee should seriously consider not scheduling confirmation
hearings on the nomination until after the
political campaign season is over.
He said, instead:
It would be our pragmatic conclusion that
once the political season is under way, and it
is, action on a Supreme Court nomination
must be put off until after the election campaign is over. That is what is fair to the
nominee and is central to the process. Otherwise, it seems to me, Mr. President, we will
be in deep trouble as an institution.
This past week Senator REID came to
the floor to discuss Senator GRASSLEY
and what he is doing, which is exactly
what then-Senator BIDEN recommended
to be done, and he made this statement. Senator REID said this past
week:
Last Thursday, the senior Senator from
Iowa addressed the Conservative Political
Action Conference, CPAC, which took place
here in Washington. In his speech to them,
here is what Senator Grassley said: ‘‘I feel
it’s about time that we have a national debate on the Supreme Court and how it fits in
with our constitutional system of government.’’
Then Senator REID continued:
The chairman of the Judiciary Committee
is suggesting that we reevaluate the Founding Fathers’ work, reevaluate the Constitution of the United States, and change the
Constitution of the United States. Why is
Senator Grassley debating what the Constitution makes clear? The Senate must provide its advice and consent on nominees appointed by the President to the Supreme
Court. Think of the irony. Justice Scalia was
a strict constitutionalist. Yet now, in the
weeks following his death, Senator Grassley
wants to throw out the Constitution just because President Obama gets to pick Scalia’s
replacement.
That is what Senator REID said this
week.
Let’s look at what Senator REID said
in 2005 on this exact same issue. In 2005,
on this floor, Senator REID said: ‘‘The
President of the United States has
joined the fray to become the latest to
rewrite the Constitution and reinvent
reality.’’
This is speaking of President Bush at
the time. Senator REID continued,
‘‘Speaking to fellow Republicans Tuesday night, two days ago. He said that
the Senate ‘has a duty to promptly
consider each nominee on the Senate
floor, discuss and debate their qualifications and then give them the up-ordown vote that they deserve.’ Referring
to the President’s words—duty to
whom? The duties of the Senate.’’ This
is from Senator REID in 2005:
The duties of the Senate are set forth in
the U.S. Constitution. Nowhere in that document does it say the Senate has a duty to
give Presidential appointees a vote. The fact
was even acknowledged by the majority leader that a vote is not required. Senator Byrd
asked the majority leader if the Constitution
accorded each nominee an up-or-down vote
on the Senate floor. The answer was no. Senator Frist was candid. The answer was no.
The language was not there, Senator Frist
said. He is correct. Senators should read the
same copy of the Constitution Senator Frist
had memorized.
Continuing with what Senator REID
said:
It is clear that the President misunderstands the meaning of the advice and consent clause. That is not how America works.
The Senate is not a rubber stamp for the executive branch.
So earlier this week, Senator REID
chastised Senator GRASSLEY, saying he
wants to rewrite the Constitution. In
2005 Senator REID stood on this floor
and encouraged all Members to read
the Constitution—that it nowhere requires that we take an up-or-down
vote. So I don’t know which one to
take on this—the current statements
from Senator REID or the previous
statements from Senator REID—because they are in direct contradiction.
Senator SCHUMER, on July 27, 2007,
speaking about the last 18 months of
President Bush’s term as President,
said:
For the rest of this President’s term and if
there is another Republican elected with the
same selection criteria let me say this: We
should reverse the presumption of confirmation. The Supreme Court is dangerously out
of balance. We cannot afford to see Justice
Stevens replaced by another Roberts; or Justice Ginsburg replaced by another Alito.
Given the track record of this President
and the experience of obfuscation at the
hearings, with respect to the Supreme Court,
at least: I will recommend to my colleagues
that we should not confirm a Supreme Court
nominee except in extraordinary circumstances.
I have also heard: Don’t look at the
words but the actions. Senator REID,
Senator SCHUMER, and, when they were
here, Senator Obama and Senator
BIDEN have all filibustered Supreme
Court nominees when they were Senators—all four of them have. Suddenly,
now this is a dangerous idea that will
shut down justice and is completely
unconstitutional, and there are shouts
of ‘‘Do your job’’ that come from the
same Senate leaders who blocked untold nominations from untold Republican Presidents and didn’t allow
amendments on basic bills.
There is a lot of emotion in this
body. I get that. There are a lot of politics in this process. I would hope to
bring some facts to light and to turn
down the hyperbole and all the rhetoric. So let me bring some basic facts
to this.
The last time a Supreme Court vacancy arose in an election year and the
Senate approved a new appointee to
the Court in that same year was 1932.
Since there is no nominee right now, it
would not be possible to fill the vacancy in time for that individual to
hear cases in the spring session of the
Supreme Court. That means any nomination selected now would only be able
to serve—in our colleagues’ arguments—in the fall, which is a much
shorter session of the Supreme Court,
before this President actually leaves.
So we are talking about the final session at the end of this fall—a very few
number of cases.
Justice Stephen Breyer, just a few
weeks ago, stated this about the passing of Justice Scalia:
We’ll miss him, but we’ll do our work. For
the most part, it will not change.
The Supreme Court is open and is
working this week. In fact, the Court
hasn’t halted at all. The Court has
heard 10 cases already since Justice
Scalia’s passing, and they are continuing to release decisions.
It is a myth that there needs to be an
uneven number of Justices for the Supreme Court to actually work. In the
past 6 years, 80 percent of the cases
were decided 6 to 3 or greater. So it is
a small minority of the cases that ever
get to a 5-to-4 decision. And we don’t
know that a 5-to-4 would end up not
being a 5-to-3 at this point.
Eight members can operate the
Court. In fact, the Constitution doesn’t
even give a specific number to the Justices. How many Justices are on the
Supreme Court has always been a decision of the President and the Congress
VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:04 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00008 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.018 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
March 9, 2016 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1359
together. The first Congress, for example, enacted the Judiciary Act of 1789,
which stated the Supreme Court consists of ‘‘a chief justice and five associate justices.’’ If you are counting
right, that is six Justices on the early
Supreme Court.
The size of the Court varied during
the 19th century, with the Court
shrinking to 5 Justices for a while, following the passage of the Judiciary Act
of 1801, growing to as large as 10 Justices in 1863. Then in 1869, Congress
changed the number to nine, where it
has remained.
But the Court doesn’t need nine Justices to actually decide a case. In fact,
Congress has established the quorum
requirements to be only six. If the
Court ends in a tie decision, 4 to 4, or
in the case of six justices, 3 to 3, the
Court will not write an opinion but will
affirm the lower court, or it will ask
for a reargument of the case.
In other words, the Court is already
set up to function and is functioning,
and it will continue to function with
eight people.
I would say what is really happening
is that the Democrats, who implemented the nuclear option while they
were leading the Senate and packed all
the lower courts, urgently want to be
able to pack the Supreme Court as
well. That will not happen.
We will also not allow a recess appointment, as has been floated multiple times in the media—the President
will just do a recess appointment and
go around us. The Senate chooses when
the Senate is in recess, not the President. So we can do this: We can remain
in continuous session without recess to
prevent a recess appointment by this
President through the rest of this year.
Many of my Republican colleagues and
I have already agreed to be in Washington every 3 days for the rest of this
year to gavel in this body in pro forma
session so this President cannot put in
a recess appointment judge.
Ironically enough, this right of the
Senate was approved by the Supreme
Court just a few years ago by a 9-to-0
ruling when this President tried to
force in new members on the National
Labor Relations Board through a recess appointment, and this Supreme
Court kicked those out, saying the
President cannot choose when the Senate is in recess.
Our Nation faces really big issues: accelerating debt, threats from terrorism, a struggling economy, major
education, and health care reform
issues. This is a moment when the people of the United States should speak
about the direction of our Nation. We
are still a nation of the people, by the
people, for the people. And for the next
President and for the next Supreme
Court nomination, we should let the
people decide.
With that, I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The legislative clerk proceeded to
call the roll.
Mr. VITTER. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr. SULLIVAN). Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. VITTER. Mr. President, last
month we all learned with great sadness of Justice Antonin Scalia’s passing after nearly 30 years on the Court.
He would have turned 80 years old on
Friday, March 11.
In recent weeks, foremost on people’s
minds as they reflect on Justice
Scalia’s legacy and his life is his dedication to the letter of the law, his respect for constitutional and statutory
text, his view that the U.S. Constitution is a sacred document which must
be read and adhered to.
His decisions and opinions were
aimed to follow the Constitution wherever it took him, even if it may not
have been to a place where he would
agree politically. Justice Scalia not
only understood the importance of not
legislating from the bench, but he also
cared deeply about the lesson being
taught by the work of the Court.
Through his writings, his opinions, including his dissents, he taught us great
lessons.
Now all of this is very important and
relevant, ironically, as we consider our
role and path forward in the decision to
fill his vacancy. Instead, unfortunately, we have seen rhetoric and arguments which fly in the face of that
dedication to the text, to the Constitution, to statutory law and rules, and
following that letter.
My esteemed Democratic colleagues
have taken to the Senate floor, and
they have encouraged outside groups to
storm committee rooms—all arguing
that somehow there is a legislative or
constitutional mandate that the Senate have hearings, take a vote now, and
not allow the American people to
weigh in through the election. They
argue that somehow the Senate is constitutionally obligated to hold hearings
and vote right now before the election,
but as Justice Scalia would surely
point out: Read the text. Look at the
Constitution. Look at all relevant statutes and rules. That is not the case. It
is clear, otherwise. In fact, it is crystal
clear. So let’s do that in homage to
Justice Scalia.
He wrote many opinions arguing for
exactly what I am saying: Read the
clear language that is at issue—either
the Constitution or a statute or whatever is at issue. He wrote opinions
against what before his time was rampant use of so-called legislative history,
looking at the history of how a law was
passed really to give people fodder to
make it up as they go along and reach
almost any conclusion and interpretation they want to. Justice Scalia
taught us—and he had a real impact on
the Court through his decisions—that
we need an unwavering commitment to
principle and respect to statutory text
as written.
As he often said in so many different
ways, ‘‘Legislative history is irrelevant
when the statutory text is clear.’’ In
one opinion he noted that ‘‘if one were
to search for an interpretive technique
that, on the whole, was more likely to
confuse than to clarify, one could hardly find a more promising candidate
than legislative history.’’ He said directly that ‘‘our cases have said that
legislative history is irrelevant when
the statutory text is clear.’’
Again, that is a big part of his legacy
and very relevant in this discussion
about how the Senate should fulfill its
duties. Let’s look at the text of the
Constitution and any relevant text like
our rules below the Constitution.
In the U.S. Constitution, article II,
section 2, clause 2 says clearly: The
President ‘‘shall nominate, and by and
with the Advice and Consent of the
Senate, shall appoint Ambassadors,
other public Ministers and Consuls,
Judges of the supreme Court, and all
other Officers of the United States,
whose Appointments are not herein
otherwise provided for, and which shall
be established by law.’’
That is what it says on the issue.
That is all it says on the issue. Those
words are straightforward, and those
words do not mandate a hearing or a
vote in any certain timeframe. It is
very clear from the Founders and from
numerous Court decisions since then
that within the constraints of those
words, the Senate sets its rules of how
to proceed on all Senate matters, including confirmations. So another very
important and very clear text that we
should read word for word and adhere
to are the standing Senate rules. Senate rule XXXI states: ‘‘When nominations shall be made by the President of
the United States to the Senate, they
shall, unless otherwise ordered, be referred to appropriate committees; and
the final question on every nomination
shall be, ‘Will the Senate advise and
consent to this nomination?’ which
question shall not be put on the same
day on which the nomination is received, nor on the day on which it may
be reported by a committee, unless by
unanimous consent.’’
It only says when the vote cannot be
taken. It doesn’t say that a hearing has
to happen or a vote has to be taken
within a certain amount of time.
Another part of rule XXXI is even
more direct on this point: ‘‘Nominations neither confirmed nor rejected
during the session at which they are
made shall not be acted upon at any
succeeding session without being again
made to the Senate by the President.’’
So this is even more direct and
makes crystal clear that there is no requirement of a hearing or a vote on
any particular nomination in any particular timeframe during a session.
Again, that is very straightforward,
very crystal clear, but the Congressional Research Service has a report
which validates and confirms the obvious. Upon their review of all of this
text, they say:
A committee considering a nomination has
four options. It can report the nomination to
VerDate Sep 11 2014 00:16 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00009 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.020 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
S1360 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 9, 2016
the Senate favorably, unfavorably, or without recommendation, or it can choose to
take no action.
So they say the obvious from reading
the relevant text. Those are the options. There is no requirement for a
hearing or for a vote within any certain timeframe.
There are other ‘‘authorities’’—I will
put that in air quotes—which confirm
this view, and ironically those authorities I am referring to are Democrats
who are taking exactly the opposite
view now. When the shoe was on the
other foot, time and time again, they
said: There is no requirement to move
forward on any certain timeframe.
The minority leader, HARRY REID,
said: ‘‘Nowhere in [the Constitution]
does it say the Senate has a duty to
give Presidential [nominees] a vote. It
says appointments shall be made with
the advice and consent of the Senate.
That is very different than saying
every nominee receives a vote.’’ That is
a direct quote.
In June of 2003, Senator PATRICK
LEAHY—he is significant because he is
ranking member of the Judiciary Committee—said clearly:
The Constitution divides the appointment
power between the president and the Senate.
It expects senators to advise the President,
not just rubber stamp his choices. It says advise and consent, not nominate and rubber
stamp.
Even further back, in June of 1992,
then-Chairman of the Judiciary Committee, now-Vice President JOE BIDEN
argued for the need to set aside partisanship and work to bring unity forward in the Senate by saying: ‘‘President Bush should consider following
the practice of a majority of his predecessors and not name a nominee until
after the November election is completed.’’ He said that during a Presidential election year, just like we are
in the midst of a Presidential election
year right now.
CHUCK SCHUMER, another leader of
the Judiciary Committee, said much
the same thing in the past, making
crystal clear that there is no requirement—in fact, he said 18 months before
the expiration of President Bush’s
term. So not during his last year, but
18 months before the end of that term
that the Senate shouldn’t confirm any
Bush nominee, except in extraordinary
circumstances.
It is very clear from their own words
that there is no obligation to use any
certain timeframe to have any absolute
committee hearing or vote within a
certain period of time. So then the
question is, What is the best thing to
do for the American people? I firmly
believe the best thing to do for the
American people is to put the American people in charge, to put them in
the lead, to maximize their role, their
power, and their vote. That is what the
opportunity of a major Presidential
election gives us.
Of course, if you have a vacancy
early on in the term of a President,
you are not going to have another big
election for some time, but that is certainly not the case right now. We are
in the midst of a huge election with
enormous consequences for the future,
and it is very clear the choices—whatever the final two choices may be—
would offer very different options in
terms of the type of Supreme Court
Justice they would appoint.
I think we best serve the American
people in almost all cases—certainly in
this case—by maximizing their voice,
their role, and their power. They often
feel absolutely shunned, put to the
side, ignored by Congress, by Washington now. We need to put them in
charge, and in this Presidential election year we have a unique opportunity
do that. That certainly is what I am
committed to doing.
I can tell you, as I travel Louisiana,
the huge majority of my fellow citizens
whom I have talked to agree with that
approach. I just finished doing four
townhall meetings in all different parts
of the State. In a few weeks I am going
to do four more, all different parts of
the State. That is not a scientific survey, but nobody came to those townhall meetings who didn’t agree with
that path forward. A great majority of
calls and emails and letters from my
fellow Louisiana citizens on this issue
absolutely confirm and support that
path forward.
Let’s put the American people in
charge. They are crying for a voice.
They are crying with frustration over
not being listened to by Washington.
This is a major decision. Let’s put
them in charge. Let’s let them lead in
this Presidential election year on this
very important issue.
Of course, whoever is elected, the
next President will have a big impact
on our country. That person will serve
for 4, maybe 8 years and make decisions that are enormous on a whole
host of issues, but this appointment to
the Supreme Court could have an even
more lasting impact, could have an impact for decades to come, and it is even
more important in that frame of mind,
in that viewpoint, to put the American
people in charge, to maximize their
role and their voice about what direction we should take.
So many Louisianians feel as I do.
The Court has strayed from Justice
Scalia’s proper philosophy of actually
reading the Constitution and reading
statutory text and applying it as written. So many Louisianians feel as I do;
that they are making it up, in many
cases, as they go along; that they are
legislating from the bench; that they
are using clever techniques, such as
looking to legislative history—something Justice Scalia, as I noted, railed
against—as ammunition to get to
whatever endpoint they desire to get
to. That is not the role of any court,
certainly not the role of the Supreme
Court.
The Supreme Court should apply the
Constitution and the law as written,
not make it up as they go along, not
legislate from the bench, not get to
some political endpoint through clever
legal arguments—just as we in understanding our role should read the Constitution, should read the Senate rules
and not suggest what is clearly not the
case; that somehow there is a mandate
to have a hearing, to have a vote in
some set period of time.
I urge my colleagues to put the
American people in charge. This is a
big decision, and I think we will do far
better putting them in charge than allowing some insider Washington game
to control and manipulate the process
without hearing their voice, which we
have every opportunity to properly
hear through this important election
this year.
Mr. President, I suggest the absence
of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The legislative clerk proceeded to
call the roll.
Ms. KLOBUCHAR. Mr. President, I
ask unanimous consent that the order
for the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
Ms. KLOBUCHAR. Mr. President, I
am so pleased we are making strong
progress on the Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act, and I hope we
will get this bill done within a day. It
is very important, especially to States
with rural areas, such as the Presiding
Officer’s and mine, and I am glad we
are starting to make headway.
U.S.-CANADA RELATIONS
Today, Mr. President, I am here to
talk about something else, and that is
the importance of the U.S. relationship
with Canada. Senator CRAPO and I cochair the Canada-United States Interparliamentary Group and have been
working in the trenches on everything
from softwood lumber, to the DetroitWindsor bridge crossing, to issues of intellectual property, to dairy, to beef,
and with the arrival of Prime Minister
Trudeau, this work has suddenly gotten a little more glamorous. We are excited about that and excited about the
Nation’s newfound interest in our important relationship with Canada. In
fact, Canada is one of our largest trading partners. There is so much business
that goes on between the Presiding Officer’s State and Canada, as well as my
State and Canada. Prime Minister
Trudeau is bringing a newfound interest in this work.
Many of our two countries’ priorities,
which include national security, infrastructure, and energy, align closely.
During this visit, I expect our relationship will deepen, and we will hear more
about how our two nations will work
together on our shared priorities. We
hope they will discuss hockey, which is
something that is very important to
Minnesota and Canada. A number of
our hockey players have actually come
from Canada, and a number of the Canadian hockey players have come from
Minnesota. But we think there are
other important topics as well.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 00:16 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00010 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.011 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
March 9, 2016 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1361
First, I will start with our economic
relationship—a relationship that supports 9 million U.S. jobs. Canada purchases more goods from America than
any other nation. If you asked people
what country in the world is the biggest purchaser of U.S. goods, I think
they might not predict that the answer
is Canada. Canada is the No. 1 buyer of
goods produced in 35 out of 50 States,
including Minnesota. Last year Canadians bought $376 billion worth of
goods made by American businesses,
and it is a two-way street. The United
States imports more than $300 billion
in Canadian goods every year.
Over the years, to enhance this relationship, we have taken many important steps to improve the flow of travellers and goods across our common
border. In the wake of September 11,
we created a U.S. passport card, which
is a secure but less expensive and more
convenient alternative to a traditional
passport. We removed unnecessary double screening of luggage—a bipartisan
bill I passed with Senator ROY BLUNT
of Missouri—and then expanded the
number of preclearance airports, which
allows American security personnel to
be in those airports. I think we are up
to eight now.
We have agreed to build a new bridge
connecting Windsor, Ontario, and Detroit, MI. It is a source of great concern. The bridge that is there now is
privately owned and has huge lines. It
is not a very good situation. So a new
bridge is in the works, and we are very
excited that our two countries worked
on that together.
I especially want to acknowledge
Ambassador Doer, the longtime Ambassador from Canada to the United
States who worked on that with our
two Ambassadors. I also want to acknowledge the newly named Canadian
Ambassador, Ambassador David
MacNaughton, who will continue the
strong diplomatic relations between
our countries.
Our national security partnership is
also incredibly important. We share
the longest border in the world with
Canada. Obviously border issues are
important, but more than that, Canada, as part of NATO, has worked with
us not only in Afghanistan, where they
supplied many troops and now provide
funding there, but they are also on the
frontline with ISIS. They actually have
hundreds of trainers working on the
frontline there. I would be remiss not
to mention them standing up to Russian aggression in Ukraine. Believe it
or not, Canada has a major Ukrainian
population, and they have been our
friend in dealing with Ukraine as well.
Prime Minister Trudeau has also
been a leader in welcoming refugees to
the country. Right after his election,
he showed up at the airport to greet
Syrian refugees. It was not just a symbol; they actually brought in 25,000
Syrian refugees during the last year
and are expected to take in 10,000 more
this year, which is significantly more
in total than the United States has
been able to bring in. We know the vetting process is incredibly important,
but we do want to thank Canada for
taking part in what is a travesty internationally.
They are working on combating
Ebola with initiatives such as Power
Africa and are also working with us on
the climate change numbers.
By the way, our two countries are
working together with Mexico. We
have formed a very powerful trading
block, and we want to encourage that
with our standards and other things
that we do in terms of building electrical capabilities to allow us, as a
North American block, with a new day
in North America, which was agreed to
among the three Presidents of countries in the last 2 years, to compete in
the block in an increasingly competitive global economy, including harmonizing emission standards and doing
other work together.
As one of the cochairs of the CanadaUnited States Interparliamentary
Group, we welcome the new Prime Minister to Washington. When I was sworn
in as a U.S. Senator in 2013, my friends
and colleagues celebrated at the Canadian Embassy. I am the first person I
have found to have my swearing-in at
the Canadian Embassy, but I chose it
to make a point—that we should not
forget one of our best trading partners.
For years it was the only Embassy
draped in banners that read ‘‘friends,
neighbors, partners, allies.’’ So many
other countries do not acknowledge
their friendship with the United States
in a way that I think they should. Canada doesn’t hide it. Canada is proud of
it. And we welcome the Prime Minister
today.
I thank the Presiding Officer, and I
yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Under
the previous order, all postcloture time
on amendment No. 3378 is expired.
VOTE ON AMENDMENT NO. 3374, AS MODIFIED
The question occurs on amendment
No. 3374, offered by the Senator from
Iowa, Mr. GRASSLEY, for the Senator
from Indiana, Mr. DONNELLY.
Hearing no further debate, the question is on agreeing to the amendment.
The amendment (No. 3374), as modified, was agreed to.
VOTE ON AMENDMENT NO. 3378, AS AMENDED
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
question occurs on amendment No.
3378, offered by the Senator from Iowa,
Mr. GRASSLEY.
Hearing no further debate, the question is on agreeing to the amendment.
The amendment (No. 3378), as amended, was agreed to.
CLOTURE MOTION
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Pursuant
to rule XXII, the Chair lays before the
Senate the pending cloture motion,
which the clerk will state.
The legislative clerk read as follows:
CLOTURE MOTION
We, the undersigned Senators, in accordance with the provisions of rule XXII of the
Standing Rules of the Senate, do hereby
move to bring to a close debate on S. 524, a
bill to authorize the Attorney General to
award grants to address the national
epidemics of prescription opioid abuse and
heroin use.
Mitch McConnell, Chuck Grassley, Deb
Fischer, John Barrasso, Shelley Moore
Capito, Roy Blunt, Johnny Isakson,
John Boozman, Mike Crapo, David Vitter, Mike Rounds, Bill Cassidy, James
E. Risch, Lindsey Graham, John
McCain, Thom Tillis, Orrin G. Hatch.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. By unanimous consent, the mandatory quorum
call has been waived.
The question is, Is it the sense of the
Senate that debate on S. 524, a bill to
authorize the Attorney General to
award grants to address the national
epidemics of prescription opioid abuse
and heroin use, shall be brought to a
close?
The yeas and nays are mandatory
under the rule.
The clerk will call the roll.
The bill clerk called the roll.
Mr. CORNYN. The following Senators
are necessarily absent: the Senator
from Texas (Mr. CRUZ) and the Senator
from Florida (Mr. RUBIO).
Mr. DURBIN. I announce that the
Senator from Missouri (Mrs. MCCASKILL) and the Senator from Vermont
(Mr. SANDERS) are necessarily absent.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
SASSE). Are there any other Senators
in the Chamber desiring to vote?
The yeas and nays resulted—yeas 93,
nays 3, as follows:
[Rollcall Vote No. 33 Leg.]
YEAS—93
Alexander
Ayotte
Baldwin
Barrasso
Bennet
Blumenthal
Blunt
Booker
Boozman
Boxer
Brown
Burr
Cantwell
Capito
Cardin
Carper
Casey
Cassidy
Coats
Cochran
Collins
Coons
Corker
Cornyn
Cotton
Crapo
Daines
Donnelly
Durbin
Enzi
Ernst
Feinstein
Fischer
Flake
Franken
Gardner
Gillibrand
Graham
Grassley
Hatch
Heinrich
Heitkamp
Heller
Hirono
Hoeven
Inhofe
Isakson
Johnson
Kaine
King
Kirk
Klobuchar
Lankford
Leahy
Manchin
McCain
McConnell
Menendez
Merkley
Mikulski
Moran
Murkowski
Murphy
Murray
Nelson
Paul
Perdue
Peters
Portman
Reed
Reid
Risch
Roberts
Rounds
Schatz
Schumer
Scott
Sessions
Shaheen
Shelby
Stabenow
Sullivan
Tester
Thune
Tillis
Toomey
Udall
Vitter
Warner
Warren
Whitehouse
Wicker
Wyden
NAYS—3
Lee Markey Sasse
NOT VOTING—4
Cruz
McCaskill
Rubio
Sanders
The PRESIDING OFFICER. On this
vote, the yeas are 93, the nays are 3.
Three-fifths of the Senators duly chosen and sworn having voted in the affirmative, the motion is agreed to.
The Senator from Utah.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 00:16 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00011 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.013 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
S1362 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 9, 2016
FILLING THE SUPREME COURT VACANCY
Mr. LEE. Mr. President, the opening
words to the preamble of the Constitution of the United States are familiar
to all of us: ‘‘We the People.’’ But what
do those words mean?
It was ‘‘the People’’ who established
the U.S. Constitution. We established,
among other things, the Senate in article I, section 1, of the Constitution. It
is for ‘‘the People’’ that my colleagues
and I, along with every other public official across these United States, now
serve.
And it was on behalf of ‘‘the People’’
that the Constitution established ‘‘one
supreme Court,’’ consisting of judges
appointed ‘‘by and with the Advice and
Consent of the Senate.’’
Since the tragic passing of the late
Justice Antonin Scalia, there has been
a great deal of debate about this particular provision of the Constitution.
But there should be no controversy.
The text of our founding charter is
clear.
The President has full and complete
power to nominate individuals to the
Supreme Court, and the Senate has full
and complete power to reject or confirm the nominee. It is as simple as
that. Indeed, the Senate retains complete discretion with respect to whether it should even consider—much less
accept or reject—Presidential nominees.
This should not be controversial. It is
how virtually every student of the Constitution—and how nearly every Member of Congress—has understood the
Senate’s power of advice and consent
for the past 228 years since the Constitution was ratified.
Senator HARRY REID said in 2005:
‘‘Nowhere in that document does it say
the Senate has a duty to give presidential nominees a vote.’’
Senator PAT LEAHY in 2003 acknowledged that the power of ‘‘advice and
consent’’ included the power to withhold consent.
Then-Senator JOE BIDEN in 1992 argued from the floor of this Chamber
that the Senate should refuse to consider a Supreme Court nominee until
the people had spoken in the upcoming
Presidential election.
But now, with the Presidential election in full swing, some of my friends
on the other side of the aisle maintain
that the opposite is true. Some argue
instead that the Senate is constitutionally obligated to hold hearings and
to vote on any candidate President
Obama might eventually nominate to
replace Justice Scalia on the Supreme
Court. I respectfully dissent.
If this a-textual and a-historical account of the Constitution were accurate—and it is not, but if it were—then
prior Senates violated the Constitution
when they did not cast up-or-down
votes on Supreme Court nominees.
Even the Standing Rules of the Senate
would be themselves suspect under this
theory, contemplating as they do that
‘‘[n]ominations neither confirmed nor
rejected during the session at which
they are made shall not be acted upon
at any succeeding session without
being again made to the Senate by the
President. . . . ’’
Neither does the prospect of a temporary eight-member Supreme Court
raise any significant constitutional
concern or even any significant pragmatic concern for the Supreme Court
of the United States.
For instance, during the Supreme
Court’s 2010-to-2011 term, the Court decided over 30 cases with 8 or fewer Justices participating, almost entirely as
a result of recusals arising, as they
often do in this circumstance, from
Justice Kagan’s nomination. Similarly,
following the retirement of Justice
Powell in 1987, the Court acted on 80
cases with 8 or fewer Justices. In short,
the sky does not fall when the Court
operates with only eight Justices. As
Justice Breyer recently stated, the
work of the Court ‘‘[f]or the most part
. . . will not change.’’
Now, we have to remember that any
Supreme Court nominee made by
President Obama would not be seated
until weeks before the people choose
the next President. Let me explain
what I mean by that. Even if the President of the United States were to
nominate someone today to serve on
the Supreme Court of the United
States to replace Justice Scalia, using
historical averages, under any calculation of the amount of time that it typically takes to confirm a Supreme
Court Justice, that confirmation could
not be completed until after the Supreme Court is scheduled to have heard
its last oral arguments for this term—
the term that began in October of 2015.
What does that mean? Well, it means
that for the rest of this year, the Justice couldn’t participate in cases being
argued this year. What that also means
is that by the time the Court resumes
its work and begins its next session
starting in October of this year, we
would be just weeks before the next
Presidential election. Yet that would
be the first moment at which any
newly confirmed Justice would start
hearing cases being argued before the
Court—cases being argued on their
merits for consideration before the
Court—just weeks before the next Presidential election.
Consider also that since the nomination of Justice Scalia to the Supreme
Court in 1986, nearly 30 years ago, it
has taken more than 70 days, on average, for the Senate to confirm or reject
a nominee after that nominee has been
submitted to the Senate for its advice
and consent.
So, again, based on that historic average, even if the President nominated
somebody today and assuming that
nominee were confirmed, that individual would not be seated in time to
hear or rule on any of the cases the
Court is considering on the merits for
its docket this year, and that would, of
course, mean that the next time arguments were heard, the first time this
particular Justice could participate in
such arguments on the merits before
the Court would be just weeks before
the Presidential election.
This is a lifetime appointment to the
highest Court in the land—a Court that
considers not only the interpretation
of Federal laws, statutes, and regulations in operation within the Federal
Government, but also the very meaning of the Constitution itself. In light
of the fact that this is a lifetime appointment to that Court and in light of
the fact that the people are about to
speak this November to decide who
ought to occupy the Oval Office, we
should, in respect and deference to the
people of this great country, wait until
the American people have spoken.
They deserve a voice.
In my view, the future of the Supreme Court is now at stake, and the
election for our next President is also,
of course, well underway already. So it
is the people who should determine
what kind of Supreme Court they wish
to have.
Now, the President is entitled, of
course, to discharge his own constitutional authority to nominate. No one
can take that from him. That belongs
to him. But the Senate is equally entitled to withhold consent and to protect
the people’s voice. We have to remember that it was considered at the Constitutional Convention the possibility
that the Senate would itself have the
exclusive power to nominate executive
branch officials. It was also suggested
that the Senate be given a veto power
over the President’s appointment prerogative. Neither of those ended up in
the Constitution. Instead, what ended
up in the Constitution, based, I believe,
on the Massachusetts Constitution,
was a shared power—one in which the
President has the power to nominate
but does not have the power to appoint,
unless or until such time as the Senate
chooses to grant its advice and consent
and thereby confirm a nominee put forward by the President.
As James Madison wrote in The Federalist Papers, ambition must counteract ambition, and the people should decide.
Thank you, Mr. President.
I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
proceeded to call the roll.
Ms. WARREN. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
Ms. WARREN. Mr. President, there is
a vacancy on the most important Court
in America, and the message from Senate Republicans is crystal clear: Forget
the Constitution. It doesn’t matter
who President Obama nominates because the Republicans will allow no
votes on that nominee. They will hold
no hearings on that nominee.
Their response to one of the most solemn and consequential tasks that our
VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:04 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00012 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.021 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
March 9, 2016 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1363
government performs—the confirmation of a Supreme Court Justice—will
be to pretend that that nominee and
President Obama himself simply do not
exist—cannot see them, cannot hear
them.
At the same time they are blocking
all possible Supreme Court nominees,
Senate Republicans are in a panic because their party seems to be on the
verge of nominating one of two extremists for President—two candidates who
think nothing of attacking the legitimacy of their political opponents and
demeaning millions of Americans, two
candidates whose extremism, Republicans worry, will lead their party to
defeat in November.
These are not separate issues. They
are the same issue. If Republican Senators want to stand up to extremists
running for President, they can start
right now by standing up to extremists
in the Senate. They can start by doing
what they were elected to do right here
in the Senate. They can start by doing
their jobs.
The refusal of the Republican Senators to execute the most basic constitutional duties of their office is
shocking, but it is not new. Article II,
section 2 of the Constitution says that
the President of the United States
‘‘shall nominate’’ judges, executive officials, and Justices to the Supreme
Court with the ‘‘Advice and Consent of
the Senate.’’ There is no secret clause
that says ‘‘except when that President
is a Democrat,’’ but for 7 years that is
how Republicans in the Senate have
acted. Since the first day of the Obama
Presidency, Republican Senators have
bowed to extremists who have rejected
the Obama Presidency and abused the
rules of the Senate in an all-out effort
to cripple his administration and to
paralyze the Federal courts. The Constitution directs Senators to provide
advice and consent on the President’s
nominee, and every Senator swore an
oath to uphold the Constitution. If
Senators object to a nominee’s qualifications, they can vote no and they
can explain themselves to the American people. President Obama and I are
members of the same political party,
but I haven’t agreed with every single
nomination he has made, and I haven’t
been shy about it. That is how advice
and consent works. Learn about the
nominee and then use your best goodfaith judgment about their qualifications, but Republican extremists aren’t
voting against individuals based on a
good-faith judgment about a specific
person. No. They are blocking votes
wholesale in order to keep those jobs
vacant and undermine the government
itself.
For years Republicans have executed
a strategy to delay votes on confirming
government officials across the board.
In 2013, only 1 year into President
Obama’s second term, Republican leaders flatly rejected his authority to confirm any judges to fill any of the three
open seats on the second highest court
in the country, and Democrats had to
change the filibuster rules in order to
move those nominees forward. Once
Republicans took over the Senate in
2015, judicial confirmations nearly
ground to a halt.
It is not just judges. For months
after the President won reelection, Republicans held up his nominees to run
the Department of Labor and Environmental Protection Agency, largely on
the suspicion that those highly qualified individuals might actually help
those agencies do their work. For years
Republicans held up nominees to the
National Labor Relations Board—even
Republican nominees—in order to cripple the ability of that 80-year-old agency to resolve disputes between workers
and their bosses. For years Republicans
held up the President’s choice to run
the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, refusing to confirm anyone unless
the President would agree to gut the
agency.
Republicans regularly hold up the
confirmation of dozens of Ambassadors,
undermining our national security and
our relationships with other nations.
Last year Republicans blocked confirmation of the Attorney General, the
highest law enforcement official in this
country—blocked her for 166 days—
longer than it took the Senate to consider the prior seven Attorneys General
combined.
For more than a year the Republican
chairman of the Banking Committee
hasn’t held a single vote on any of the
16 Presidential nominees sitting on his
desk, not even nominees who are critical to maintaining the financial stability of this country or the ones who
are responsible for choking off the flow
of money to ISIS.
The message couldn’t be clearer. No
matter how much it damages the Nation, no matter how much it undermines the courts, no matter whether it
cripples the government or lays waste
to our Constitution, Senate Republicans do pretty much everything they
can to avoid acknowledging the legitimacy of our democratically elected
President. For too long the Republicans in the Senate have wanted to
have it both ways. They want to feed
the ugly lies and nullify the Obama
Presidency while also claiming they
can govern responsibly. Well, that
game is over. Candidates motivated by
bigotry and resentment, candidates unable to govern, candidates reflecting
the same extremism that has been
nursed along for 7 years right here in
the U.S. Senate are on the verge of
winning the Republican Party’s nomination for President.
Now Republican Senators must make
a decision because here is the deal: Extremists may not like it, but Barack
Obama won the Presidency in 2008 by 9
million votes. He won reelection in 2012
by 5 million votes. There were no recounts and no hanging chads, no stuffing the ballot box or tampering with
voting machines, no intervention by
the U.S. Supreme Court. No. President
Obama was elected the legitimate
President 7 years ago, and he is the legitimate President right now. So if it
is true that some Republican Senators
are finally ready to stand up to the extremism that denies the legitimacy of
this President and of the Constitution,
I say to you: Do your job. Vote for a
Supreme Court nominee. Do your job.
Vote on district court judges and circuit court judges. Do your job. Vote on
Ambassadors. Do your job. Vote on
agency leaders and counterterrorism
officials. If you want to stop extremism
in your party, you can start by showing the American people that you respect the President of the United
States and the Constitution enough to
do your job right here in the U.S. Senate.
Thank you, Mr. President.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
proceeded to call the roll.
Mr. MERKLEY. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
ROUNDS). Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. MERKLEY. Mr. President, today
I rise to address the responsibility of
the Senate in its advice and consent
role under the Constitution. Of course,
the President’s duty is to nominate a
Justice when the vacancy exists for a
Justice, and that responsibility is very
clearly written into our Constitution.
The Constitution also very clearly conveys the Senate’s role in providing advice and consent. This is the vision of
our founding document. Actually, our
Founding Fathers wrestled with exactly how to best construct this nomination and confirmation process. They
knew there had to be a way to appoint
judges in the judiciary and certainly
ambassadors and directors in the executive branch, how to go about that. In
those early efforts to craft the Constitution, some argued that this responsibility should be with the Executive, with the President; others argued
that, no, no, it is better given to the
assembly, to the body. Well, that conversation went back and forth. We can
read a little bit about the thinking
through Alexander Hamilton’s The
Federalist Papers 76 because he laid
out the conversation as it went back
and forth. They recognized that there
were certainly advantages to having
the President make the appointments.
I quote from Alexander Hamilton’s
paper:
The sole and undivided responsibility of
one man will naturally beget a livelier sense
of duty and a more exact regard to reputation. He will under this account feel himself
under stronger obligations and more interested to investigate with care the qualities
requisite to the stations to be filled.
In short, direct your accountability
to one individual who would be responsible for carrying that out.
But they were also concerned about
some disadvantages of the Executive
VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:04 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00013 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.021 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
S1364 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 9, 2016
making appointments. Giving absolute
power of appointment to the President
could lead to unwarranted favoritism,
as it was put, or incompetence in those
appointed.
Well, then again they thought, how
about the assembly? They recognize
that you have certainly a rich makeup
of views in an assembly and perhaps
that could be of value. On the other
hand, they also felt that there would be
a lot of horse-trading over appointments and that they would just never
get the job done, and indeed, as Hamilton noted, ‘‘the intrinsic merit of the
candidate will be too often left out of
sight.’’
So that was the dilemma, and they
came up with a strategy to take the
strength of the Executive and the
strength of the assembly; specifically,
that you would indeed have the power
invested in one person, and of course
the Executive, in creating nominations
for the executive branch, wanted to
make sure those—there was an inherent desire to make sure those folks
were competent, but there was also
still this concern about, what if there
was too much favoritism and what if
individuals of unfit character were appointed to the bench? So give the Senate the chance to review and provide
consent or, as Hamilton wrote, ‘‘to prevent the appointment of unfit characters.’’ That is what it boiled down to.
So the strength of the Executive and
the strength of the Senate combined in
order to solve this knotty problem of
how you filled the key posts in the judiciary and the key posts in the executive.
All of this led to the exact crafting of
article II, section 2, of the Constitution. It referred that the President—
‘‘and he shall nominate, and by and
with the Advice and Consent of the
Senate, shall appoint Ambassadors,
other public Ministers and Consuls,
Judges of the supreme Court,’’ and so
on and so forth. Of course, this isn’t,
when there is a vacancy, the President
can if he or she desires; no, it is shall.
This is a responsibility. You have to
fill the position. So the President has
an obligation under this clause, and we
in the Senate have an obligation to follow up with the advice and consent
function.
That is where we stand and why this
esteemed Chamber has operated now
throughout the more than 200-year history in providing that check and balance on the Executive. It is the President’s responsibility to nominate, and
it is our responsibility to vet those
nominees, to examine them, to see if
they have the fit, the characteristics of
both their own qualifications and their
character. That is the basis: qualifications and character. That is the question that we have addressed in this
Chamber century after century.
But here we are today with a unique
circumstance in which the leadership
of this body has said: We are not going
to fulfill the responsibility that is
given to us under the Constitution. We
are going on strike. We don’t want to
do our job.
I think the American people are saying the opposite: Senate, do your job.
Senate, you were assigned a job in the
Constitution. Senators, you signed an
oath to abide by that Constitution.
You have a responsibility under the vision of our Government to make it
work. You have a responsibility to fulfill that job, to do that job.
The Supreme Court is only the latest
manifestation of the challenges we
have had with nominations for the executive and for the judicial. I hope we
can come together and develop a much
more rapid system of vetting nominees
and, if there is not a major objection,
having those at lower levels essentially
conveyed quickly into their posts, because this is something that we know
will be the case.
We know that over time, there will
be Republican administrations and
there will be Democratic administrations. We know that under the vision of
three co-equal branches of Government, it is not the role of Congress to
systematically undermine the other
two branches. That was not the design
of our Constitution. So we wield a particularly sacred responsibility not to
use our partisan inclinations as a tool
to try to destroy the Presidency of a
different political party or to pack, basically, the courts according to our
own philosophy. We are not doing that
now. As a body, we are failing our responsibility.
The Constitution says: Do your job.
The people of America say: Do your
job. The leadership here in the Senate
is saying: We refuse to do our job. That
is just wrong.
Our Court does play this critical role
in making sure that our laws and regulations stay within the bounds of the
Constitution. It is not since the Civil
War that the Supreme Court has been
left with a vacancy of more than a
year. The Civil War is a very unique
circumstance. Since the 1980s, every
person appointed to the Supreme Court
has been given a prompt hearing and a
vote within 100 days. Since 1975, it has
taken on average only 67 days to confirm Supreme Court nominees.
We can look at the list: Justice
Kagan, 88 days; Justice Sotomayor, 67
days; Alito, 83; Roberts, 63; Breyer, 74;
Ginsburg, 51; Thomas, 99; Souter, 69;
and, on through the list, Kennedy, 65;
Scalia, who just passed away, 85; and
Rehnquist, 89.
You notice that these are nominations by both Democratic Presidents
and Republican Presidents. And in each
case, the Senate—regardless of the
party in control of the Senate—did
their job, vetted these nominees, held a
vote on them, and proceeded. But now
we have more than 317 days still left in
this administration, and the leadership
of this body is saying that they are not
going to do their job for 317 days. They
are not going to meet with a nominee,
not going to hold a committee meeting
on the nominee, not going to report
that to the floor, not going to hold a
floor debate—not because of the standards set up in the Constitution, not because of this standard: Is this a fit
character? Is he or she fit by qualifications? Is he or she fit by judicial temperament? The standard of unfit character—no, this is a strike, a job strike
based solely on partisan politics. This
is bringing partisan politics into the
very place it should never be—confirmation of our judges not at 100 days
but more than 300 days, which is totally out of sync with the history of
this Nation, totally out of sync with
the responsibility that each of us is assigned to help provide advice and consent.
More than a dozen Supreme Court
Justices have been confirmed in the
final year of a Presidency. I want to
emphasize that because there have
been folks here in the Chamber who
have said: Well, there should be some
special rule. In fact, they even thought
there was some special rule that you
don’t confirm a Supreme Court Justice
in the final year of a Presidency.
That simply is not the case. More
than a dozen Justices have been confirmed in the final year of a Presidency. Most recently, Justice Kennedy
was confirmed in the last year of President Reagan’s final term. It was not a
Republican-led Senate that did that
confirmation. It was a Democrat partyled Senate that did that confirmation
because the Democratic Party leadership and Members said: This is not partisanship. This is a responsibility we
have, and we are going to execute it.
But, unfortunately, we are hearing a
very different story at this moment
from the Republican leadership in this
body, and it is an embarrassment. It is
an embarrassment to this Chamber. It
is an embarrassment to our responsibility. I certainly am appealing that it
be remedied. There is time to remedy
it. The President hasn’t put forward his
nomination yet. It is time to recognize
that perhaps those comments that
were put forward in the heat of the moment can be set aside and we can still
do our job.
When people elect a President, they
don’t say to the President: Do your job
for 3 years, but you get the last year
off. When they elect us, they don’t say:
Well, do your job for 5 years, but you
get the last year off. They certainly
don’t say: And by the way, after a couple of years, you can take a year off
from your constitutional responsibilities. A President is elected for all 4
years. Our responsibility is to provide
advice and consent, and it goes on continuously.
In the last 200 years, the Senate has
carried out its duty to give a fair and
timely hearing and a floor vote to the
President’s Supreme Court nominees—
whether the President was a Democrat
or a Republican, whether this body was
led by a Democratic majority or a Republican majority. Let’s not change
that tradition. Let’s not fail our responsibility. In fact, let’s honor our
constitutional responsibility.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 00:16 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00014 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.023 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
March 9, 2016 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1365
I will close by calling on my colleagues: Let’s work together to diminish the partisanship and improve the
problem-solving. Let’s turn down the
rhetoric in terms of our back and forth
during this campaign year and, certainly, turn it down enough that we
can fulfill that core responsibility that
provides advice and consent on nominations and certainly on what is probably the most significant and important nomination—that of an individual
to the Supreme Court of the United
States of America.
To summarize, the Constitution lays
out the job before us. The American
citizens expect us to do our jobs. Let’s
do our job.
GENETICALLY MODIFIED FOOD
Mr. President, I am going to shift
gears here to discuss a bill that has recently come out of committee and the
way that we should consider responding to it. This conversation is all about
defending Americans’ right to know
what is in the food they buy and Americans’ right to know what is in the food
they feed to their family and they feed
to their children. I will also discuss the
legislation I am putting forward to attempt to be a bridge between some
very different visions on that topic.
Let me start by saying this is all
about genetically modified food and
the information provided to citizens on
the package about that. This often
turns into a debate: Well, GMO has
done some wonderful things over here.
Others say: Well, it has created some
problems over here.
I am going to acknowledge that both
of those are true. It has done some very
positive things, and I will mention
some in specific. But it has also created some challenges, some problems,
and I will mention some of those. But
after we recognize that that is the
case, where do we come back to? Here
is where we come back to: We should
enable the individual in our beautiful
Republic to make the decision and not
have Big Government make the decision or suppress information. That is
what happens in the non-‘‘we the people’’ world. That is what happens in
dictatorships. That is not what should
happen here in the United States of
America, where individuals have the
right to know what is in their food.
Let me go ahead and explain some of
the benefits and some of the challenges. Let’s start with the example of
golden rice. Golden rice was developed
by the International Rice Research Institute. It provides greater amounts of
vitamin A in the rice to reduce the deficiency that exists in many diets
around this planet for that essential vitamin.
That is a pretty positive development. I don’t know at this point of any
side effects or other things that have
been brought to light. Nature is complicated, but for now, let’s recognize
that providing vitamin A where it is
needed is a pretty positive thing.
Let’s take a look at carrots. Carrot
cells have been transgenically modified
to produce a chemical that treats
Gaucher’s disease. Gaucher’s disease is
a metabolic disorder where people lack
a specific enzyme which helps rid the
body of certain fatty substances. Those
fatty substances then accumulate,
causing enlarged livers, spleens, bone
damage, bruising, and anemia. These
transgenic carrots are part of the answer, part of the solution.
Let’s turn to sweet potatoes. Researchers are genetically modifying
sweet potatoes to withstand multiple
viral infections commonly encountered
in South Africa, making this a much
more successful crop and providing
more food to people who need more
food. So that is a positive development.
All of this is not a one-sided scientific picture. There are also scientifically documented concerns. We can
call them scientifically documented
problems that have occurred with
transgenic crops.
Let me start by noting that the most
common transgenic crops in America
are crops that have been modified to be
resistant to glyphosate. That is an herbicide. After the introduction of these
resistant crops, which means you can
put more herbicides or weed killers—
you can put a lot more weed killer onto
the acreage—you basically knock out
the weeds much more easily and less
expensively than with other strategies.
What happened? Well, basically,
since 1994—early 1990s—several major
crops have become almost 100-percent
transgenic-glyphosate tolerant. The
amount of glyphosate put on the crops
has grown from 7.4 million pounds in
1994—let’s round it off—to 160 million
pounds in 2012, and the number keeps
climbing. This is a huge amount of herbicide. Try to picture in your head 160
million pounds of herbicide. Well, it is
so effective in killing everything except the GM corn, GM soybeans, and
GM sugar beets. It is so effective in
killing everything else that very few
weeds survive. One of the weeds that
doesn’t survive, because most don’t, is
milkweed. Milkweed happens to be the
food for the monarch butterfly. As we
have seen the enormous increase of
glyphosate applied to our fields, we
have seen a crashing of the monarch
butterfly ecology. It is not the only
thing affecting the monarch. Several
other things are affecting them as well,
but it is—in scientific study after
study—a very significant factor.
Let’s also take a look at something
else; that is, that all of this glyphosate
doesn’t stay on the fields. When it
rains, it gets washed into our waterways. Our waterways are full of things
that are affected by our herbicides, and
so it has a big impact on the ecology of
our streams and rivers. That is a serious scientifically documented issue
that we are continuing to learn more
about as time passes.
Let’s turn to another issue. This is a
fascinating story. It is about a pest
that bores into the roots of corn. It is
called the corn rootworm. The corn
was modified so it would have a pesticide in the cells and would kill the
rootworm when it bored into the corn,
but guess what happened. If you do this
on a vast scale, Mother Nature comes
along and has a few genetic mutations
here and there and suddenly that
rootworm starts to propagate with others that are now resistant to this pesticide that has been put into the roots.
So now more pesticide has to be added
to the corn, and as a result of that we
have an opposite outcome than what
was expected.
The hope was that this would reduce
pesticides, but now you have to put the
pesticides back in it, and so now we
have the evolution of superbugs. Here
we have the adult beetle, and the
rootworm is a reference to the larvae
stage of this beetle. These are the type
of concerns that are raised.
I say all of this just to explain that
while there are benefits of transgenic
crops, there are also issues that are
raised in the natural world. So anyone
who takes this floor and says that nobody should be concerned about bioengineered crops is simply refusing to
look at the scientific literature that
says, no, there are things we should be
concerned about. That is why it comes
back to the right of the individual to
know what is in their food. They want
to know if it is a transgenic crop, and
they can look up the details and make
their own decision. Why have Big Government say that we are going to make
the decision for you? Why have Big
Government say that we don’t trust
you with information and we are not
going to allow you to know what is in
your food? No. That should be in some
dictatorship, not in the United States
of America.
Well, we have a big battle now because out of committee last week has
come a bill, and this bill is known as
the DARK bill. It stands for Deny
Americans the Right to Know because
Big Ag says that we don’t believe in
this whole ‘‘we the people’’ model of a
republic. No, we like to have a government that makes decisions for people
and that denies information to people
because we don’t trust them, as consumers, to decide what they want to
eat. We don’t want them to know what
they are feeding their children and
their family. We want to make the decision for them. Well, 90-plus percent of
Americans disagree. They want the information to make the decision on
their own. They can find out about the
benefits over here. They can find out
about the concerns over here. Different
foods have different transgenic crops in
them. They should get to make the decision and not have Big Government
making the decision for them.
This bill, the DARK Act, prohibits
counties, cities, and States from any
decision to provide information on a
package to their citizens about what is
in their food regarding transgenic
crops.
I got together with the representatives of the food industry and advocates for consumer information. I tried
VerDate Sep 11 2014 00:16 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00015 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.025 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
S1366 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 9, 2016
to find out if there is an overlap so we
can craft a bill that will bring these
two communities together, and we
made some progress on that, and so I
will share that with everyone.
Basically, a big concern of the food
industry—totally legitimate—is that
they don’t want 50 different standards
in 50 different States or to have a
bunch of counties decide to make up
their own rules, which would result in
hundreds or thousands of rules. If you
operate a warehouse, you can’t send
different cans of soups to grocery
stores across the country. No. So that
makes sense. They want a 50-State solution. Furthermore, they want to
have it acknowledged that there is
nothing pejorative about the concept of
bioengineering or transgenic. They
want to know that people know this is
a situation where there are some positive benefits, and I have mentioned
some of those positive benefits. They
don’t want a label on the front of the
package because they think it would be
scary to consumers, and they want
flexibility as to exactly what system
they use to alert consumers.
The bill I put forward provides all of
those goals for a 50-State solution.
There is nothing on the front of the
package, nothing pejorative, and provides flexibility for the food industry.
It does not go to the final step that
much of the food industry wants, which
is no unpackaged labeling because then
there is no compromise between the
two sides.
The consumer side would like to have
something mandatory so it is on each
package of food. They want it clear so
a person can pick up the food or the
can or the sack and have it easy to
identify on the package. That is the
compromise bill I have put forward. It
enables the food industry to either put
an asterisk on an ingredient that is
bioengineered and have it explained
below or it enables an industry to put
a symbol in parentheses after the ingredient or it enables an industry to
just put a symbol on the ingredients
panel. In Brazil they use a ‘‘t.’’ It is a
very simple ‘‘t.’’ It is not scary, but for
those who want to know, it is identified.
This approach of simplicity—nothing
scary, simple access that is easy to
see—this is the bulk of what both sides
want to accomplish so we can have a
50–State standard.
It has been endorsed by a number of
groups. Over the last few days my bill
has been endorsed by Campbell’s,
Stoneyfield, and Nature’s Path. It has
been endorsed by Amy’s Kitchen and
Ben & Jerry’s and Just Label It.
We can give up the ability of each
State to have a separate labeling system if we do this simple symbol or parentheses or asterisk on the ingredients panel so a person who cares can
look it up.
I think about it this way. My daughter has always wanted to buy products
that don’t have highly enriched corn
syrup or high fructose corn syrup.
Along the way, she read something and
said: I am just not sure that is something I want to buy. So she picks up a
package, turns it over, and often the
ingredients on the package have tiny
print, but she can figure it out. It is
the same for this. Enable the consumer
who is willing and wants to make the
effort to be able to pick up a can—
again, it doesn’t have to be on the
front—and find out what is going on.
This is the world standard. There are
64 other countries, including 28 members of the European Union, Japan,
Australia, and Brazil, that all require
some type of indication on the ingredients panel or on the package. Do you
know who else is in that group? China.
China is a dictatorship. China doesn’t
deny its citizens the right to know.
How is it possible that a bill in this
Chamber has been introduced to take
away the right of Americans to know
what is in their food? Even China
doesn’t do that, and we must not do it
either.
I appreciate the folks who have already signed up to sponsor this bill.
Senator LEAHY, Senator TESTER, Senator FEINSTEIN, Senator SANDERS, Senator MURPHY, Senator GILLIBRAND, and
Senator BLUMENTHAL, thank you.
Thank you for standing up for your
citizens’ right to know. Thank you for
standing up for a fair compromise that
solves the big problem the food industry is facing with the potential of 50
different States having 50 different
standards. Thank you for finding the
area of compromise that works on both
sides of this equation.
I appreciate the endorsements. I appreciate the sponsors, but what I really
appreciate is that we have freedom of
speech in our country to be able to
carry on this conversation, but how is
it consistent to have freedom of speech
and then say that we want to ban information from our consumers? How is
that consistent? This is like the mob
that says that we don’t want our citizens to read certain books so we are
going to burn them, we are going to
ban them—and that is what this DARK
Act does. It has been introduced and
went through the Agriculture Committee. It bans the ability of States to
provide information to their consumers. That is just wrong. Even China
doesn’t go there, and we should not go
there either.
I thank the Presiding Officer.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The legislative clerk proceeded to
call the roll.
Mr. PORTMAN. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. PORTMAN. Mr. President, earlier this afternoon we had a very
strong vote here in the U.S. Senate to
move forward on the legislation we are
currently considering. It is called the
Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act. It is legislation that is intended to make the Federal Government a better partner with State and
local governments, with our nonprofits
who are in the trenches around the
country, and with all of our States
dealing with this now-epidemic level of
heroin addiction, prescription drug addiction, and overdoses.
Today, as we are here in the Senate,
on average, we will lose over 100 people
a day in the United States of America
to deaths from overdoses. Frankly,
that is just part of the problem, as horrible as that is. So many people are
being saved by this miracle drug called
naloxone or Narcan. Also, others who
may not be overdosing are not working. Their families are broken apart.
They are committing crimes to support
their addiction. So many Americans
are not achieving their God-given purpose because of this addiction issue
that is gripping our country. Our legislation is meant to address it in a very
direct way.
The debate on the floor that we had
over the past week has been very interesting to me. It is the first time in decades that this Congress has taken up
this issue in this manner. We have had
a very open debate on addiction policy.
What does it mean? I think what you
heard Members say on both sides of the
aisle is that we have learned a lot
about addiction over the years and
that addiction now is viewed by most
as a disease, an illness. Like other illnesses, it needs treatment.
I think that is a very important
change in terms of how we address this
issue, and the policy before us today on
this floor that I hope we will vote on in
the next 12 hours or so represents a
change in thinking about this, that indeed we want to do everything we can
to prevent the addiction in the first
place, to keep people out of the funnel
of addiction, to have better efforts in
education and prevention, and that is
in this legislation. But also, once we
have people who are addicted, we need
to get them into treatment. And for
people who are arrested for possession,
who are users of drugs, it is better to
get them into treatment and recovery
than just getting them into jail or prison because we have found that hasn’t
worked. So the criminal justice system
has a role to play here—legalization is
not a good idea—but that ought to be,
in part, diverting people into treatment that works better for them to be
able to get at this problem. Otherwise,
folks will continue to see these incredibly high levels of use, addiction, and
all the negative consequences that
stem from that.
I thank my coauthor of this legislation, Senator SHELDON WHITEHOUSE. He
and I have worked together over the
past few years on this legislation,
bringing in experts from all over the
country and getting expertise from our
home States. In Ohio, we had a number
of roundtable discussions that added a
lot of important input to be able to
come up with legislation that actually
VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:04 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00016 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.027 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
March 9, 2016 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1367
works, that is actually going to direct
funding to evidence-based programs
and prevention and treatment and recovery that work.
We talked a lot to our law enforcement community. That is one reason
the Fraternal Order of Police supports
our legislation. So does the Sheriffs’
Association, so do the prosecutors, and
so do the attorneys general, because we
have actually worked with them to
say: How can you be more effective in
dealing with this very real problem you
have in your community? And if you
talk to law enforcement, you talk to
firefighters, you talk to emergency
medical folks, they will tell you this
issue is at the top of their list. They
are frustrated by it. They are looking
for a solution, and this legislation
helps to come up with the solution.
I also thank Senator AYOTTE, Senator KLOBUCHAR, and 42 bipartisan cosponsors for their support of this legislation. It is comprehensive, it is evidence-based, and it is going to make a
difference.
Not only has it had a lot of support
here in the Senate—and I hope we will
see that again in the final vote—but it
also has support in the House of Representatives. There was a companion
bill at one time that was identical to
our legislation, also called CARA, the
Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act. Ours has changed a little bit
through the process, but it is very
similar to the House companion bill.
There are over 80 cosponsors to that
legislation. It is a bipartisan bill on the
House side as well.
So this is one of those issues where if
we pass it here in the Senate, we have
a very good chance of passing it in the
House and getting it to the President
for his signature so it can begin to
make a difference in our communities.
The reason we are here today talking
about this is, again, because so many
people are suffering. There are 23 million Americans, it is said—23 million
Americans—who are in recovery from
addiction. Think about that. We are
doing this for them, to ensure that
they can have successful recoveries, to
help them to ensure that they can keep
their lives together and not fall back
into this struggle of addiction.
With 23 million people recovering,
think of the millions who are still
struggling. Together, those who are recovering and those who are addicted
have begun to stand up and let their
voices be heard. That is one of the differences I have seen in this debate, is
that the stigma that has been associated with addiction has begun to be removed.
There was a rally here on the Capital
Mall several months ago. It was called
the Unite to Face Addiction rally.
There were people there from all over
the country. Thousands of people came
to Washington, DC—thousands. And
the message from them was, one, pass
CARA, this legislation—and I appreciate their help. We wouldn’t be here
today on the floor talking about this
issue if they hadn’t engaged with their
elected representatives in the House
and the Senate and our leadership to
help us get this moving. Second, there
message was, look, addiction is a disease and it has to be treated like other
illnesses, and we have to have legislation that helps break the stigma associated with drug addiction so that we
can address it and we can begin to get
people out of the grip of addiction and
get our communities and families out
of the grip of addiction. This is a cause,
and it is one that requires law enforcement and the criminal justice system,
but it also requires love and faith and
communities coming together. It is one
that we can only carry out together—
all of us, not as Republicans or Democrats or Independents but as Americans, as fathers and mothers, family
members and friends and coworkers
who care about those who are facing
this great challenge of addiction.
CARA now has the support of over 130
groups around the country. These are
criminal justice groups. These are people who are in the trenches every day
dealing with treatment and prevention.
These are folks who are in public
health. These are people who are in law
enforcement and understand the importance of this. They have all come together to say: Let’s pass this legislation so we can begin to implement this
evidence-based program to respond to
this epidemic.
It does add prevention and education
efforts. It does do a lot to get prescription drugs off the shelves and get the
medication out of the hands of our
youth. It does allow us to monitor
drugs. It authorizes law enforcement
task forces to combat heroin and methamphetamine in areas that are particularly hard hit. It expands the availability of the miracle drug we talked
about earlier—it doesn’t always work,
but it has saved a lot of lives—called
naloxone or Narcan.
In the criminal justice system, it
does identify and treat individuals suffering from substance abuse disorders
and expands diversion and education
efforts to give those individuals that
second chance.
We give special help in this legislation to our veterans. We establish more
funds for these veterans treatment
courts. I have been to them in Ohio.
They are incredible. Yesterday, I
talked about the story of one of the
veterans who had been in and out of
the prison system. Now he not only has
his life back together, he has his family back together. He is back in school
getting a degree. He is one example of
many who got off track because of
PTSD, because of an addiction, used
self-medication to deal with his PTSD,
was in the prison system and is now
back out. We are supporting that effort.
We do help women who are
postpartum and suffer from addiction.
We do help babies who are born addicted. We have this incredible situation where in Ohio we now have a 750-
percent increase in the number of babies who are born with this syndrome—
with addiction. They have to be taken
through withdrawal. I have gone to
these neonatal units with my wife, and
we have seen these incredibly compassionate doctors and nurses. What I hear
from them is, you have to do something. This legislation takes that important step to the Federal level.
CARA supports recovery programs
focused on youth and building communities of recovery. It creates a national
task force on recovery to get the experts really engaged to help us to improve ways to address some of the collateral consequences caused by addiction.
Economists will tell us that addiction now costs this country about $700
billion every year. Think about that.
That is lost productivity. That is more
expensive health care. If you go to the
emergency room in your community to
find out what is going on, you will see
a lot of people coming in because of addiction. There is the cost of policing
and incarceration. Law enforcement
tells me that most of the crime being
committed in our communities is now
being committed because of this issue.
So $700 billion every single year is a
lot of money, no doubt, but addiction
costs us something else too: It costs us
in dreams that are never fulfilled, in
families who are torn apart, in lives
that are lost. We don’t just measure
our success in dollars and cents. We
measure it in safer neighborhoods, less
crime, in empty jail cells, and by the
number of people who never have to
struggle with drug abuse in the first
place because of more effective prevention and education. We measure it in
the moms and dads who beat addictions
so they can come back to be with their
kids and bring their families back together. We measure it in the families
who are not torn apart but instead are
healed.
As we move forward to pass this legislation—the Comprehensive Addiction
and Recovery Act—our message is a
really simple one. To those who struggle with addiction, to those who think
they cannot overcome, to those who
believe there is no one out there who
cares about them or can help them:
You are not alone. We are with you.
There is hope. I have seen people beat
this. I have known people who have
beat this. You can beat this.
And we can be a better partner here
at the Federal Government to be able
to help people overcome this struggle.
We need to pass this bill and get it
signed into law to begin to make a real
difference for the families we represent.
The House has companion legislation
also called CARA. They have a big bipartisan group supporting it. After we
pass this legislation here—because I
am confident we will based on the vote
this afternoon—I hope the House will
take it up, take up CARA, and get it
passed. Let’s get it to the President for
his signature, and let’s truly begin to
VerDate Sep 11 2014 00:16 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00017 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.028 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
S1368 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 9, 2016
deal with this epidemic—it is at crisis
levels, it is urgent, and it can’t wait—
so that we, all of us, can begin to make
a real difference for those we represent.
Thank you, Mr. President.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
SCOTT). The Senator from Maryland.
UNANIMOUS CONSENT REQUEST—EXECUTIVE
CALENDAR
Ms. MIKULSKI. Mr. President, Senator CARDIN of Maryland, my colleague, and I are here on the floor
today to ask that two nominations for
the Federal bench, the district court,
be confirmed. They are the next two
judges in line on the Executive Calendar for the Federal district courts.
One is Mr. Waverly D. Crenshaw, Jr.,
a highly qualified nominee from the
State of Tennessee. The other is Ms.
Paula Xinis from our own State of
Maryland, a brilliant, talented lawyer
who also is ready to be confirmed. Both
have been approved by the Judiciary
Committee. Mr. Crenshaw was approved in July and has been waiting for
a vote. Ms. Xinis was approved by the
Judiciary Committee in September. So
it has been more than 6 months to
allow Senators to be able to evaluate
the excellent work done by the Judiciary Committee on whether these nominees should be confirmed.
We think it is time that the full Senate did its job and gave these two outstanding candidates for the bench a
vote. Therefore, I come to the Senate
floor with Senator CARDIN and I ask
unanimous consent that the Senate
proceed to executive session to consider the following nominations: Calendar No. 215 and Calendar No. 307;
that the Senate proceed to vote without intervening action or debate on
these nominations in the order listed;
that the motions to reconsider be considered made and laid upon the table
with no intervening action or debate;
that no further motions be in order to
the nominations; that any related
statements be printed in the RECORD;
that the President be immediately notified of the Senate’s action and the
Senate then resume legislative session.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Is there
objection?
The Senator from Texas.
Mr. CORNYN. Mr. President, reserving the right to object, I would just
point out to my friends from Maryland,
and the senior Senator who has made
this consent request asking that we
move off of the current legislation—the
Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act—off of that important legislation into executive session to consider
these nominations, that it is the prerogative of the majority leader to set
the agenda. If every Senator could
come to the floor and cherry-pick different nominations from the calendar
and ask consent that we move to executive session and then consider those,
it would result in some chaos. For
those reasons, I object.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Objection is heard.
The Senator from Maryland.
Mr. CARDIN. Mr. President, I am
certainly disappointed by the Senator
from Texas objecting to the request of
the senior Senator from Maryland, Ms.
MIKULSKI.
The request of Senator MIKULSKI is
for us to consider two article III judges
who are next in line for consideration
before the U.S. Senate. They have
cleared the committee. They have both
been approved by the committee by
voice vote, a unanimous vote within
the Judiciary Committee.
I know Paula Xinis—the vacancy to
be filled in Maryland at University
Park. She joined the law firm of Murphy, Falcon & Murphy in Baltimore.
She is a senior trial attorney, well
qualified to take the seat of the former
chief justice, Deborah Chasanow. She
was appointed by President Obama in
March of 2015. We are now approaching
the 1-year anniversary of her appointment—1 year anniversary for a noncontroversial, well-qualified appointment to the district court.
Let me just talk a little bit about
fairness. I heard what the Senator from
Texas said about the majority leader
scheduling the votes on the floor of the
Senate, but I think my colleagues
should be aware of the facts in regard
to filling judicial vacancies.
We have completed the confirmation
process on 16 article III judges since
the beginning of this term of Congress.
The comparable number in the last 2
years of a Presidential term where the
President was of the Republican Party
and the Senate was controlled by the
Democrats—just the opposite of what
we have today—was the year 2007 and
2008 under President George W. Bush.
The Judiciary Committee was chaired
by Chairman LEAHY. That year, by
March 9, we had cleared and confirmed
40 judicial appointments—40 compared
to 16 in this Congress. By the end of the
year, we had approved 68 of President
Bush’s nominees.
Going back to the other time with a
Republican President and with a Democratically controlled Senate—President Reagan—in 1987 and 1988, under
Chairman BIDEN, by March 9 of the last
year, the Senate had confirmed 47 of
his nominations, compared to 16 this
year, and by the end of the year, we
had confirmed 85 nominees, including a
Supreme Court Justice, Justice Kennedy.
We have pending right now on the
floor of the Senate that have cleared
committees—every single one by voice
vote unanimously—we have 12 article
III judges who are ready for action and
5 other judicial appointments, for a
total of 17. But that is not the whole
story. We have 25 nominees who are
still pending before the Judiciary Committee, including Stephanie Gallagher
of Maryland, to fill a vacancy. This is
not the only vacancy we have in Maryland. We now have two in Maryland
waiting for action by the U.S. Senate.
So there is a matter of fairness here.
There is also a matter of respect for
the judicial branch of government in
allowing the courts to be able to function.
The district court is where most individuals get their justice. That is the
trial court. That is the court where
most of our citizens will go for their judicial relief. We have vacancies where
appointments have been made that are
noncontroversial, well-qualified people,
and we can’t get a vote on the floor of
the U.S. Senate? My friend from Texas
tells me this is the prerogative of the
majority leader. It is our responsibility
to act on these nominations.
Senator MIKULSKI has set up a process in Maryland where we take an
interview process to get the very best
talent to serve on our courts. I am honored to work with her as we go through
the process of finding the very best to
serve on the courts. How do you expect
to allow their name to come forward
when it takes a year to consider a nomination? If you want to get the very
best on the courts, we have to act, and
we have to be responsible.
Let me just say something. We have
to take up these nominations. I appreciate that we always have a lot of work
that we have to do. We have time today
to get these nominations done. I call
on the majority leader and I call on my
friends to say: Look, let’s get our court
vacancies filled. Let’s carry out our responsibility and vote on these nominations.
With that, I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Maryland.
Ms. MIKULSKI. Mr. President, why
am I here today on the floor asking for
these two nominations to be confirmed? They are the next two judges
in line on the Executive Calendar for
our Federal district courts: Waverly
Crenshaw, Jr., a highly qualified and
talented nominee from the great State
of Tennessee; and Paula Xinis, nominated from my State of Maryland.
Both Mr. Crenshaw and Ms. Xinis have
been waiting for months to have their
day and get their vote. Mr. Crenshaw
has been waiting since July, Ms. Xinis
since September. I think 6 months is
enough time to provide our advice and
evaluate these nominees. It is time to
do our jobs and give these candidates a
vote. I urge the Republicans to allow
these nominations to move forward.
We are easily on pace to be the least
productive Senate in recent history.
Last year Republicans confirmed the
fewest judges in almost 50 years: a
total of 11 in 2015. Since Republicans
took over the Senate the number of judicial emergencies has nearly tripled,
which leaves courts overworked and
understaffed.
Now some Republicans say there is
precedent for their obstructionism.
Some Republican Senators have tried
to fudge their numbers, saying the
judges confirmed during our lameduck
session at the end of 2014 should count
toward their abysmal numbers for 2015.
Well, what about those numbers? I
didn’t realize that’s how the Senate
VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:04 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00018 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.029 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
March 9, 2016 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1369
worked: that we take credit for work
that others did. Some Republican Senators specifically asked for lameduck
passage of their nominees. They didn’t
want to wait for the next Congress—
but they’re stalling now, before we are
even in lameduck. They are already
talking about stopping nominations
with 9 months left to do work.
A lack of judges has real consequences for the American people. Due
to our constitutional protections,
criminal trials must happen with a
‘‘speedy and public trial.’’ What does
this mean in our courts? Criminal
trials end up prioritized, protecting
those charged with crimes, but civil
trials are put on hold—sometimes for
years—while we wait for judges to have
time for them. What does this mean for
the American people? Judges spend less
time on cases, judges have to encourage cases to settle instead of getting
their day in court, judges have to encourage defendants to consider plea
deals rather than wait out a lengthy
trial process. Justice delayed is justice
denied, which is what is happening
around our country right now.
For Marylanders to receive their day
in court, we need Judge Paula Xinis to
be on the bench. I was extremely proud
to nominate Paula Xinis to President
Obama with Senator CARDIN. She is a
brilliant litigator and public servant.
When I consider nominees for the Federal bench, I have four criteria: absolute integrity, judicial competence and
temperament, a commitment to core
constitutional principles, and a history
of civic engagement in Maryland. Ms.
Xinis exceeds these criteria. She has
dedicated her career to the rule of law.
The persistence and character she has
shown in advocating for her clients and
in her activities in the community
make her truly an outstanding nominee. She has a deep respect for the law
and what it means to every American.
She will ensure that everyone who
comes before her truly feels that they
have been heard and have received
equal justice under the law.
It is absolutely critical that we have
judges in our courts to make sure that
the judiciary is strong, independent,
and that all Americans get their days
in court. The President has made dozens upon dozens of judicial nominations. Now the Senate must do its job.
Enough time has passed on these two
nominees. It is time to have our say. I
do not take this duty lightly, but I will
do my job. I carefully evaluate nominees and render an independent judgement based on my commitment to core
constitutional principles. These candidates deserve timely hearings and
timely votes. We have had the hearings. We have had plenty of time to
evaluate their merits. Now is the time
to vote.
Mr. President, I would like to compliment once again my very able colleague from Maryland for his statement, in which he laid out facts and he
laid out the historic precedent, and I
want to associate myself with those remarks.
I also want to add that I am really
frustrated. I am so frustrated that, No.
1, President Obama doesn’t get to be
President Obama. His job as President
is to nominate competent people for an
independent branch of government, the
Federal judiciary. He did his job. Then
it came to the Senate. Really, we
thank the Judiciary Committee because they did hold a hearing and did
their due diligence to examine the worthiness of whether these nominees
should be brought to the Senate. Do
they have the judicial temperament?
Do they have the judicial experience?
Are they of sound character to truly be
independent and render impartial justice, which our Constitution mandates?
The Judiciary Committee said yes.
It comes to the Senate on something
called the Executive Calendar. That is
Senate-speak for the nominating calendar. It means they are on the calendar, waiting their turn to have a
vote, but this is just a slowdown.
We don’t want to be in a showdown
here. I didn’t bring this up with Senator CARDIN to disrupt consideration of
the opioid bill. We have a terrible problem in Maryland with opioids and heroin. We are for this bill. We are for bipartisan action, but we are driven to
taking action, asking for unanimous
consent because we are not getting action.
I would have yielded to a compromise
if the gentleman from Texas, himself a
member at one time of the Texas Supreme Court, had said: How about Mr.
Crenshaw first and Ms. Xinis after the
break that will be coming up? You
know, we are like college kids; we get
spring break. Well, we would agree to
that. All we are looking for is for Mr.
Crenshaw, who was on the calendar before Ms. Xinis, to go first.
We are not pushing, but we are persistent. All we want is a time certain
when we could get a vote on Ms. Xinis.
We are now in the business of discouraging people from coming into public
service. They are willing to put their
career on hold and their life on examination to be able to serve on the Federal bench or other nominations. She
did it. Our nominee did it. She is in a
law firm. Her career is on hold.
We also have Ms. Stephanie Gallagher, who is a Federal magistrate
judge, waiting for a hearing. What are
we doing here? People are finally going
to say: I don’t want the hassle. I don’t
want the harassment. I don’t want to
go through all this just to wait, wait,
wait, wait.
The Senate needs to move in an orderly way. When a nominee has been
moved through the process, nominated
by the President, gone through the due
diligence of the Judiciary Committee,
and is waiting, I think we ought to do
it. I think we ought to take a couple of
days and just vote on these nominations.
I believe our courts are overwhelmed.
There are backlogs in the courts. There
are people waiting for their ability to
have a trial. We need good judges. We
need to be able to make sure that the
people are willing to serve and they
have the credentials, the judicial temperament, and the character to serve.
We need to be able to at least give
them a vote. Now, if you don’t like the
Obama nominees, vote them down.
Vote them down, but don’t slow down
the process.
We have a constitutionally mandated
process. Let’s follow it. Let’s do our
job. We have Mr. Crenshaw and Ms.
Xinis. We are happy to have Mr. Crenshaw go first, but we sure would like a
date for Ms. Xinis.
We call out to our colleagues to give
us a date, give us a vote. Give it to us
now.
Mr. CARDIN. I suggest the absence of
a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The bill clerk proceeded to call the
roll.
Mr. MCCAIN. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. MCCAIN. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent to address the Senate as in morning business.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
The Senator from Arizona.
OMNIBUS AND DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION BILL
Mr. MCCAIN. Mr. President, last
night we saw another unusual election
result. We see a ‘‘businessman’’ now in
a very significant lead for the nomination of the Republican Party, the party
of Abraham Lincoln and Ronald
Reagan.
As I watched the postmortems last
night and this morning, we see again
that many of those who voted cite as
one of their primary—if not the primary—reasons distaste, anger, and
frustration about Washington, DC, specifically the Congress of the United
States, as well as the President. They
believe they need somebody who is an
outsider, someone who is not ‘‘of the
establishment.’’ I guess that applies to
anyone who is in elected office.
Some of us have been surprised. Certainly no one predicted these outcomes, not only on the Republican side
but on the Democratic side. We saw our
colleague from Vermont engineer quite
a stunning upset in the State of Michigan last night. But he also—even
though a Member of the Senate, Senator SANDERS clearly is speaking in opposition to the machine, the business
as usual in Washington.
Sometimes we ask ourselves why the
American people give us such a low approval rating. I see polls show that the
approval rating of Congress is 12 percent, 13 percent, 14 percent, sometimes
as high as 15 percent. I would inform
and remind my colleagues that it
wasn’t always like that. We didn’t always have such a low approval rating
in the Congress by the American people.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 00:16 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00019 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A09MR6.002 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
S1370 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 9, 2016
I think it is worthy of note that in
the last year since regaining the majority, we have enacted some legislation that I think we could be proud to
go back and talk to our constituents
about, whether it be education reform,
where we did away with common core,
or whether it be a highway bill that
was much needed to provide infrastructure for our States, counties, and
towns. We passed a budget. We passed a
defense authorization bill that has
some of the most significant reforms in
history. But the fact is, those numbers
haven’t changed, and they haven’t
changed sometimes for good reason.
That is why I come to the floor
today, because I am ashamed and embarrassed, as a representative of the
people of my State, to talk about billions of dollars of unnecessary wasteful
spending of their taxpayer dollars, and
it happened on the Omnibus appropriations bill—omnibus. A lot of my constituents don’t know what ‘‘omnibus’’
means. What it means is, we are required to take up 13 appropriations
bills. We don’t do it—and I would put
the responsibility for that on the other
side of the aisle, but it doesn’t matter,
really, because we end up, at the end of
the year, with a massive, hundreds of
billions of dollars bill that is about this
high, that none of us have seen or read
and there is no amendment to it, and
we have approximately 48 to 72 hours
in which to vote yes or no, with the option being the government not continuing to function. That is not the
way to do business. That doesn’t inspire any confidence in us on the part
of the American people, and it is disgraceful.
So the omnibus, again, was passed
with votes from both sides, actually,
but the fact is that our responsibility
was to take up these bills one by one,
to examine them, to have amendments,
and to have the Congress—in this case,
the Senate—work its will. We didn’t do
that.
Here it was. We walked in, and here
was this bill—not that size but this
size—that no one had read, no one had
a chance to peruse, and even if we had,
we couldn’t do anything about it because the bill was not amendable because if we amend it, then it bounces
back to the other side of the Capitol,
and we run out of time, and the government shuts down. That is the wrong
way to do business.
One of the major reasons for what
happened is it is open to incredible
abuse. I came to the floor today to talk
about the abuse of the most sacred responsibility we have, which is the defense of this Nation.
I am proud to be chairman of the
Senate Armed Services Committee, a
post I aspired to for many years. We
work hard on the Defense authorization bill. We work hard in the Senate
Armed Services Committee. We work
on a bipartisan basis. We have hearings, we examine the issues, and we examine the programs. We are talking
about, again, hundreds of billions of
dollars, of taxpayers’ dollars, whether
it be pay and benefits for the men and
women who are serving or whether it
be the equipment they need or many of
the policies that govern the defense of
this Nation. And I am proud of the
work we do.
So after producing a bill with an
overwhelming majority vote—90-some
votes—with the authorization for all of
this to do with our Nation’s defense,
the Appropriations Committee decides
to overrule what we have authorized,
in violation not only of the way the
Senate is supposed to function but in
violation of a resolution adopted by the
Republican conference, which I will
read:
Earmark Moratorium
Resolved, that it is the policy of the Republican Conference that no Member shall
request a congressionally directed spending
item, limited tax benefit, or limited tariff
benefit, as such items are used. . . .
Et cetera.
So what was in this omnibus bill? Let
me give you the best example: $225 million for a ship called a joint high-speed
vessel, for a ship the Navy did not
want. No one asked for this.
We had hearings in the Armed Services Committee on shipbuilding. We examined all of the proposals. Some of
them we didn’t accept. Others we did.
Others, through votes in the committee, debate, and discussion, came up
with our shipbuilding authorization.
So what was done in this Omnibus
appropriations bill by the Appropriations Committee? For the second year
in a row, $225 million the Navy did not
request and did not need.
By the way, my friends, I would not
take too much time in the Senate, but
building a ship is just the beginning of
the expense. You have to man it, you
have to put the ammunition on it, you
have to put the equipment on it, and
you have to operate it for as long as 30
years, and the Navy did not want it.
The Navy has lots of unmet military
requirements. So what was put in there
and why? Because, frankly—and I use
these words without reservation—it is
made in Mobile, AL. It is made in Mobile, AL. It is blatant. It is blatant.
And then, of course, there were so
many other items in it.
It is like any other evil. First you
condemn things. Then you condone
them. Then you embrace them. There
is no better example of that than the
so-called money for ‘‘medical research.’’ In fact, years ago somebody
decided: Hey, we will spend some
money for medical research on some of
the illnesses that affect the men and
women in the military. I don’t take exception to that. But it grew and grew
and grew and grew and grew.
Now, in this bill, $1.2 billion extra—
not million but billion dollars—is
asked for. Let me give examples: $120
million for breast cancer, $12 million
for lung cancer, $6 million for multiple
sclerosis, $20 million for ovarian cancer, $7.5 million for epilepsy, $12.9 million for HIV/AIDS. My friends, all of
those are worthy causes. All of those
should probably be funded.
We should do all those things, but
not on the Defense bill. It was not authorized and was jammed in for the
Willy Sutton syndrome. The Willy Sutton syndrome is about the famous bank
robber who, when asked why he robbed
banks, said: That is where the money
is. Well, the defense appropriations is
where the money is.
So here we have, over the last 23
years, as it has grown and grown and
grown, just $2.4 billion of the $10 billion
spent on these congressionally directed
medical research programs being relevant to the military. In other words,
$7 billion went to research things such
as osteoporosis and mad cow disease instead of training, equipment, and care
for our troops and their families.
We do not have enough money to
care for the men and women in the
military and take care of their families
and take care of their medical needs.
We don’t have enough money for that
as a result of sequestration. So what
did they do? They put in $1.2 billion
more in medical research.
There are a few other examples.
There is an additional $7 million in
funding for a machine gun. These guns
are made with a 500-percent increase.
There is $750 million for a National
Guard and Reserve equipment fund and
$600 million in additional funding for
DOD’s science and technology budget.
This is very interesting, my friends,
this science and technology budget.
Here is what happens. They put out
$600 million, and it is supposed to be
for ‘‘scientific and technology research.’’ But it doesn’t say for what
specific item. So what happens is the
members of the Appropriations Committee then write to the Department of
Defense and tell them to spend certain
money on certain projects. That is the
way of getting around the letter of the
earmark ban if not the spirit of it.
Then, of course, there is the Russian
rocket. Today we are having to use for
space launches Russian rocket engines.
The company that makes these Russian rocket engines happens to be run
by cronies of Vladimir Putin. In fact,
two of the cronies of Vladimir Putin
are such thugs and gangsters that they
have been on our sanctions list. We
have sanctioned them. Yet our friends
on the Appropriations Committee,
again, with ULA—the people who are
buying these rocket engines—are based
in Alabama and, of course,
headquartered in Chicago, IL. The engines, as I mentioned, are manufactured by this Russian company that is
controlled by a guy name Chemezov
and a guy named Rogozin, who have
been sanctioned. Yet we are sending
tens of millions of dollars to them.
What we did was we restricted the
cost and encouraged the competition,
and we had hearings on it. It was a big
issue. We had votes in the committee
on it, we discussed it and we debated it.
And so what did the appropriators do?
They put a provision into this bill reversing what we authorizers did. That
VerDate Sep 11 2014 00:16 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00020 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.033 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
March 9, 2016 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1371
is in complete violation of the rules of
the Republican conference.
So I have talked very often with our
twelve freshmen. I can’t be more proud
of what these freshmen Senators have
brought to this conference. They have
brought enthusiasm, they have brought
knowledge, they have brought youth,
they have brought military experience—people like Senator ERNST and
Senator COTTON and others who bring
their military experience. I am so
proud to have many of them serving on
the Armed Services Committee. I have
asked them to get together and condemn this. I campaigned for almost all
of them. They promised the people of
their States, as I promised the people
of my State, that I wouldn’t allow this
waste of billions of their tax dollars,
that I would fight against it. So I am
asking our freshmen Senators to join
together—and I hope they will because
I have had conversations with them—
to reject this, and, if we go into another appropriations omnibus, that
they will not allow this to happen.
Why did I focus my comments on defense? It is for two reasons. No. 1 is obvious. I am chairman of the Committee
on Armed Services. So I take strong
exception when the men and women
who are serving in the military are
having to leave the military involuntarily because we don’t have enough
money, yet they are wasting billions—
billions—of taxpayer dollars. Second of
all, it is not right. It is not right. And
thirdly, we authorize—we authorize—
and our bill is passed by the Senate and
the House, for 53 straight years, and
signed by the President of the United
States.
This bill is important to defend the
Nation. When our careful deliberations,
our votes, our hearings, our debates
day after day on the floor of the Senate
as we consider the authorization bill is
then overturned—overturned—and
pork barrel projects such as a $225 million extra vessel the Navy neither
needs nor wants are added to it, then,
my friends, do not be surprised when
we have an approval rating of 12 or 13
or 14 percent.
The American people are smart. Our
constituents are smart. When they see
billions of dollars wasted in this fashion, it is no wonder we receive their
condemnation and their sarcasm and
their disapproval.
So I am asking my freshmen colleagues to take the lead—to take the
lead because they are the ones who are
closest to the people—and to help me
reject this corrupt process. And it is
corrupt.
I want to also assure all of my colleagues that if they try this again—if
they try this again—I will do everything in my power—everything in my
power—to make sure it is reversed or
that it never happens to start with. We
owe the American people much better
than the process I just described.
Mr. President, I note the presence of
the senior Senator from Texas, and I
yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Texas.
Mr. CORNYN. Mr. President, I thank
my friend, the senior Senator from Arizona, for his great work over the years,
and particularly now in the Committee
on Armed Services, which he chairs. He
has been tenacious in his attempt to
make sure that no dollars are inadvertently or unknowingly wasted, especially when it comes to the Pentagon.
I, for one, believe this is the No. 1
priority of our country. I know he
shares that view. But it is pretty hard
to make the argument that we ought
to continue to give more money to the
Pentagon if the money is not being
used efficiently, either because of their
internal administrative problems or for
some other reason.
I know, because I happened to be at
the Pentagon this morning, that many
of our military chiefs are concerned
that the things that are being put in
appropriations bills are not things they
actually want or need and that there
are other priorities. The best way to
get those vetted is through the Senate
Committee on Armed Services and
working with the Appropriations Committee to make sure the money is
being used as efficiently as possible
and not wasted—certainly not on
things the military doesn’t want or
doesn’t need.
So I thank my colleague for his continued leadership.
Mr. President, I wanted to talk about
a few topics here. No. 1 is the Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery
Act, the legislation we have been working on now for 2 weeks. Anybody who
has been listening understands the importance of this legislation, which will
help stem the tide of the massive epidemic of opioid prescription drug abuse
and heroin abuse that continues to
claim lives across our country.
This bill is actually a good example
of how the Senate can work in a bipartisan fashion to advance good policies
that positively impact the lives of ordinary American citizens. I know most
people in this polarized environment
are not aware of this bipartisan work
we have been able to do over this year
and last year, but we have actually
done a number of good things. Some, if
you told them, they might not even believe it, but to the people who are open
to the facts, I think this is another
good example. Of course, in this instance, it has been the result of the
strong leadership of the junior Senator
from New Hampshire, Ms. AYOTTE; Senator PORTMAN of Ohio; the chairman of
the Judiciary Committee, the senior
Senator from Iowa, Mr. CHUCK GRASSLEY; along with our Democratic counterparts, people like Senator WHITEHOUSE.
I am hopeful this legislation will contain an amendment I offered last week
to help those who struggle with both
substance abuse and mental illness. It
is estimated that more than 10 million
Americans suffer from both addiction
and mental health disorders. These are
called co-occurring disorders. It is a
fact that many people who don’t otherwise get treatment for their mental
health problems try to self-medicate,
making their lives even more complicated and worse, and that is what
this amendment is designed to address.
Many mental health and substance
abuse services, like specialty courts,
have operated on separate tracks, and
they only treat one part of the problem. This amendment really isn’t all
that earth-shaking. All it would do is
make the commonsense link between
mental health and substance abuse,
something that we direct our existing
criminal justice programs to apply to
these coexisting disorders as well. That
way people who struggle with both addiction and mental health problems
can have both of those problems addressed using the money we are already
appropriating and already spending in
grants to local law enforcement and
medical providers.
It would also expand substance abuse
and transitional services to help those
suffering from co-occurring disorders
to receive the treatment they need to
recover. So I look forward to voting on
this legislation and getting it passed
soon.
I would note that we are having a few
bumps along the way, in terms of our
Democratic friends allowing votes on
amendments. There are apparently
about 25 different amendments that
have been negotiated between the Republicans and Democrats, but I am told
our Democratic friends are objecting to
any amendments by Senators who happen to be running for election in 2016.
Now, the Democratic leader, in a fit
of candor the other day, said they were
going to object to an amendment authored by the Senator from Wisconsin,
Mr. JOHNSON, because he is running for
election. Well, I would ask them to
back off of that sort of political
hardball and to let us get our work
done.
It doesn’t help when they object to
noncontroversial amendments or they
take certain amendments hostage because they do not want somebody to
score points by getting something
done. I mean that is why we are sent
here; it is to get things done for our
constituents.
Regarding the amendment I mentioned just a moment ago, that apparently is one of those being held hostage. I would like to share a letter
from the National Alliance on Mental
Illness, the American Correctional Association, and the National Association
of Police Organizations that supports
the amendment I just talked about. If
the Democratic leadership will not listen to me, maybe they will listen to
them. I hope they will listen to the
voices of the families who suffer from
mental illness and to law enforcement
officials.
Mr. President, I ask unanimous consent that this letter be printed in the
RECORD.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 00:16 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00021 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.042 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
S1372 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 9, 2016
There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the
RECORD, as follows:
MARCH 2, 2016.
Hon. JOHN CORNYN,
Hart Senate Office Building,
Washington, DC.
DEAR SENATOR CORNYN, On behalf of the
undersigned mental health, substance abuse
and criminal justice organizations, we are
writing to express our support of the Mental
Health and Substance Abuse Act amendments to S. 524, the Comprehensive Addictions and Recovery Act (CARA).
Approximately 65% of persons incarcerated
in jails and prisons across the United States
have substance use disorders. Many of these
individuals have co-occurring mental illnesses such as depression, post-traumatic
stress disorder, or schizophrenia.
It is further estimated that 2 million people with serious mental illness are admitted
to jails across the U.S. each year. Twenty
percent of all inmates in state and federal
prisons, approximately 314,000 individuals,
have serious mental illness. Many of these
individuals also have drug or alcohol use
problems.
Historically, mental health and substance
abuse services have been operated separately, and coordination in addressing the
needs of people with co-occurring mental illness and substance use disorders has proven
challenging. This has been true as well with
specialty courts established to address the
unique needs of non-violent offenders with
substance use disorders (drug courts) or mental illness (mental health courts). Drug
courts have frequently not been equipped to
address the needs of people with mental illness and mental health courts have frequently not been equipped to address the
needs of people with substance use disorders.
The provisions included in the Mental
Health and Substance Abuse Amendments
would be helpful in addressing these problems.
Section 802 would add ‘‘mental health
treatment and transitional services for those
with mental illnesses or with co-occurring
disorders’’ among those prioritized for assistance when transitioning out of criminal justice systems.
Section 803 would include ‘‘training for
drug court personnel . . . on identifying and
addressing co-occurring substance abuse and
mental health problems’’ to federal criminal
justice training priorities.
Section 804 would add grants for developing and implementing specialized residential substance abuse treatment programs
that ‘‘provide appropriate treatment to inmates with co-occurring mental health and
substance abuse disorders or challenges.’’
Inclusion of these provisions in CARA
would be very helpful in fostering positive
treatment outcomes and in reducing recidivism among offenders with mental illness
and substance use disorders.
Senator Cornyn, we greatly appreciate
your strong leadership on these issues and
stand ready to help in any way we can to
move them forward.
Please contact Ron Honberg with NAMI
with any questions or if we can provide further support.
Sincerely,
National Alliance on Mental Illness
(NAMI), American Correctional Association,
National Association of Police Organizations, TASC, Inc. (Treatment Alternatives
for Safe Communities—Illinois), The National Alliance to Advance Adolescent
Health, American Orthopsychiatric Association.
CALLING FOR APPOINTMENT OF A SPECIAL
COUNSEL
Mr. CORNYN. Mr. President, separately, earlier this morning I joined my
colleagues on the Senate Judiciary
Committee to hear testimony from the
Attorney General of the United States,
Loretta Lynch.
As a former attorney general of my
State, I have always taken a great interest in our system of justice at the
State level and now certainly at the
national level, and I have tried to do
everything I can to help strengthen the
rule of law and help keep the American
people safe, and that includes transparent and fair investigations.
I spent a little bit of time asking the
Attorney General this morning about
her Department’s investigation into
the former Secretary of State, Hillary
Clinton, and her use of a private email
server during her tenure. I have talked
many times on the floor about my concerns surrounding her use of an unsecured email server. The former Secretary did refuse to use the government server and decided to basically
play by her own rules, setting up a
server at her home in New York. But
the fact is, this sort of reckless conduct put our country at great risk.
Several experts from the intelligence
community have outlined how her unsecured server left her emails—some
highly classified—vulnerable to hacking in cyber attacks. So this is a very
serious matter.
Last fall, about 6 months ago, I asked
the Attorney General to appoint a special counsel to fairly and fully conduct
an investigation. That is because Secretary Clinton is not just a random citizen or former government employee;
her case is awfully high-profile. As a
result, I think there are many questioning whether she is being treated in
exactly the same way as any other citizen would be treated under similar circumstances or whether she is getting
some sort of preferential treatment.
Because the Attorney General is a political appointee of the President of the
United States and given Ms. Clinton’s
high profile, there are real conflicts of
interest and real concerns about politics ahead of justice. Those could be
addressed and mitigated by providing a
special counsel, as the law provides, to
provide some measure of independence
from the Attorney General so the public can have confidence that this case
is being treated just like every other
case and not with some sort of political
favoritism based on a conflict of interest.
This morning, I questioned the Attorney General about recent reports
that the Department has granted immunity to the staffer who set up Secretary Clinton’s private server.
So anybody listening understands,
the only reason immunity would be
granted in a criminal investigation is
if somebody invokes their Fifth
Amendment rights against self-incrimination. But if given immunity,
then that individual must cooperate
with law enforcement authorities and
cannot refuse to answer questions because they no longer have any likelihood or any chance of being convicted
of that crime, having been granted immunity.
This does indicate that this investigation has taken on a new level of seriousness, and I suspect the FBI continues to be hard at work trying to get
to the bottom of this, as I would expect
them to do. I hope this indicates that
the Department of Justice is treating
this case with the great care and gravity it requires. They are integral to
this grant of immunity because the
FBI can’t do this on their own, and it
takes the prosecutors of the Department of Justice to agree to a grant of
immunity as part of an investigation.
I still believe the American people
deserve an independent investigation,
and I will continue to press for the appointment of a special counsel to that
end.
MENTAL HEALTH REFORM LEGISLATION
Finally, Mr. President, I want to address another issue I questioned the
Attorney General about, and that is
about needed reforms to our mental
health system. I believe I repeated to
her today—I have repeated this story
so many times, I sometimes forget
when I have said it before. But I recently had a chance to meet with a
number of major county sheriffs, and
somebody asked me: Would you like to
meet the largest mental health provider in America?
I said: Well, sure.
He said: Well, he is over here. It is
the sheriff of Los Angeles County.
So the fact is, many people incarcerated in our jails are suffering from
mental illness, and they may have
committed petty crimes, such as trespassing and the like, but they are not
getting their condition treated as long
as they are warehoused in jails. Many
communities, such as my hometown of
San Antonio, TX, have created a model
of how to divert people from jail to get
their mental health issues treated and
at the same time make sure we don’t
continue this turnstile of people coming in and out of our jails when their
underlying mental illness problems are
not being treated.
I asked her to take a look at a bill I
introduced, the Mental Health and Safe
Communities Act, which is designed to
help communities and families who are
struggling to help their loved ones who
are mentally ill. Many families don’t
have access to adequate treatment or
lack the resources to comply with doctors’ orders.
The fact is, back in the nineties,
back when a major policy change was
made in America and people were essentially turned out of institutions
where the mentally ill were treated,
there wasn’t any followup to make sure
there was some sort of safety net or
some follow-on treatment to make sure
their needs were taken care of.
Today, any of us who have walked
down the street in a major American
city know we have a lot of homeless
people living on our streets who are essentially suffering from some form or
another of mental illness, and their
VerDate Sep 11 2014 00:16 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00022 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A09MR6.004 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
March 9, 2016 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1373
needs are not being addressed. Some of
them, perhaps because they abused alcohol or other drugs in order to try to
medicate or take care of their problems on their own, end up committing
crimes of one type or another, not necessarily what I would call a serious
crime but serious enough to get them
arrested and put in jail.
I am hopeful that we will take this
opportunity, as we are looking at our
criminal justice system at large, along
with prison reform and legislation that
passed out of the Senate Judiciary
Committee—which I hope will soon
come to the floor of the Senate—to
deal with issues like this confluence of
mental health and criminal justice in a
way that is more enlightened, in a way
that is cheaper, and in a way that is
more humane and more efficient than
simply warehousing people who are
mentally ill in our criminal justice
system.
We can do better, and I am hopeful
that models like those in Bexar County, TX, where mentally ill persons are
able to find programs that actually
help them solve their underlying problem—those kinds of models are helpful
to the rest of the country and to us as
we try to craft means for our communities to better care for those suffering
from mental illness.
I look forward to moving this legislation soon. The chairman of the Health,
Education, Labor and Pensions Committee, Senator ALEXANDER, tells me
he has been working with Senator
MURRAY, his ranking member, along
with Senator CASSIDY and Senator
MURPHY, on another piece of legislation that they are proposing on mental
health. My hope is that the group of us
who are interested in this issue can
cobble together a consensus piece of
legislation which the majority leader
could then bring to the floor of the
Senate to let us do some additional important bipartisan work to help address this problem.
I don’t see any Senator wishing to
speak, so I suggest the absence of a
quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
TOOMEY). The clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
proceeded to call the roll.
Mr. FLAKE. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
CUBA
Mr. FLAKE. Mr. President, after decades of isolation, we are seeing a measured shift in our policy toward Cuba.
We have resumed diplomatic relations,
expanded travel opportunities, lifted
caps on financial assistance between
families, and eased trade restrictions.
I congratulate the administration for
spearheading these changes. It took
courage to embark on this path. These
policy changes are supported by the
vast majority of Cuban Americans.
They are applauded by sector after sector of the U.S. business community,
and they are welcomed by Americans
at large, but still it took someone to
lead and President Obama did. I applaud him and his administration for
doing so.
Make no mistake, conditions are improving for the Cuban people because of
these changes. There are some who do
not fully appreciate the meaningfulness of this opening to Cuba. They
maintain that we have somehow offered concessions to the Cuban Government without benefit to the United
States or to the Cuban people. Some
contend that we have moved prematurely when human rights issues remain unresolved in Cuba.
To be clear, human rights abuses persist in Cuba. We all seek to remedy
these abuses. Yet extending 50 years as
the Cuban Government’s convenient
scapegoat for the failure of socialism is
unlikely to yield gains in human rights
in the future any more than our policies have done in the past. Instead, this
opening to Cuba takes full advantage
of the opportunities presented by the
failures of socialism. Recognizing the
inherent right of Americans to travel
to Cuba isn’t a concession to dictators.
It is an expression of freedom. It is
Americans who are penalized by our
travel ban, not the Cuban Government.
During my first visit to Cuba in 2001,
I told the Cuban Foreign Minister in a
meeting in Havana that I was attempting to lift the U.S. travel ban. I added,
if the Cuban Government didn’t improve its human rights effort, I would
seek to lift the entire trade embargo. It
was taken as an attempt at humor, of
course, but for me it was no joke. I
have always believed that denying
Americans the ability to travel to and
trade with Cuba has done more to extend dictatorial rule on that island
than any other policy we could have
adopted.
For far too long U.S. administrations, both Republican and Democratic, have insisted that U.S. measures, such as ending the travel ban or
easing the trade embargo, must be met
by moves by the Cuban Government to
improve the human rights condition of
the citizenry. I understand this instinct, but I will submit that ending
the travel ban and easing the trade embargo, even when done unilaterally,
leads to better human rights conditions in Cuba.
Milton Friedman wrote that economic freedom is ‘‘an indispensable
means toward the achievement of political freedom.’’ Far from being concessions to dictators, changes in our
policy toward Cuba are reinforcing and
advancing opportunities for Cubans in
the private sector. Citizens who are totally dependent on government for
their livelihood are subject to the
whims of all-powerful leaders in a way
that those who are economically independent are not.
In a very real sense in Cuba, the economic agenda is the human rights
agenda. Recognizing its precarious economic position in recent years, the
cash-strapped Castro regime has laid
off thousands of government workers
and expanded legal opportunities in the
private sector. This has given way to a
dramatic rise in the number of entrepreneurs on the island who are running
restaurants, bed and breakfasts, taxi
services, barbershops, beauty salons,
and much more. In fact, it is estimated
that as many as one-third of Cuba’s 5
million workers are now operating in
Cuba’s private sector. This exponential
expansion of Cuba’s entrepreneurial
class would not have happened were it
not for U.S. policy changes in 2009 that
has led to an explosion of travel and remittances among Cuban Americans.
Some suggest that remittances to the
island are responsible for 70 to 80 percent of the capital used in small businesses in Cuba.
Recent changes to U.S. regulations
allowing for additional travel and remittances have further expedited the
expansion of the private sector in
Cuba. Additional regulatory changes,
such as allowing the so-called peopleto-people exchanges to be conducted on
an individual as opposed to a group
basis, would propel this movement
even further. Again, this entrepreneurial expansion in Cuba has not only
given scores of Cubans a better quality
of life, it has lessened their dependence
on the Cuban Government in a way
that has improved their human rights
condition.
The recent bilateral air service
agreement also represents a key piece
to ensuring the continued travel of
Americans to the island. This agreement will, for the first time in 50 years,
provide scheduled air service between
the United States and Cuba. Frequent
and regular travel between the two
countries will continue to open economic ties, and it will lead to private
sector economic opportunities on the
island.
I should note that the administration
has done just about all that its authority permits to affect change on the island. In the coming months, it will be
up to Congress to take the next steps.
I hope that we—particularly those of
us on this side of the aisle who believe
so strongly in the value of free markets
and free enterprise—will remember
these principles as we promote democracy and human rights in Cuba.
Margaret Thatcher famously said:
‘‘There can be no liberty unless there is
economic liberty.’’ This statement is
as true in Cuba as it is anywhere in the
world. It is my hope that this principle
will guide our actions as we endeavor
to promote freedom and liberty in
Cuba.
I yield back the remainder of my
time.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The legislative clerk proceeded to
call the roll.
Ms. MURKOWSKI. Mr. President, I
ask unanimous consent that the order
for the quorum call be rescinded.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 00:16 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00023 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.045 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
S1374 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 9, 2016
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
Ms. MURKOWSKI. Mr. President, I
am here this afternoon on the floor to
join with colleagues as we discuss the
Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act, CARA. I would suggest that
from the perspective of families across
the country, many would look at this
and say this is probably one of the
more important pieces of legislation
that this Senate could be taking up
this year.
If we think about this crisis, this epidemic that we are seeing across the
country with opioid addiction, it is
probably one of the most pressing public health issues facing American families all across the country. As we have
heard from colleagues, this is not just
one single State’s issue. This is not
just one region of the country. This is
across all 50 States. I always like to
think that in Alaska, because we are so
far away, we are so remote, perhaps we
might be insulated from some of the
negative aspects of this modern society. In fact, we cannot isolate, we cannot insulate ourselves from the scourge
of the drugs and the drug addiction we
are seeing.
This addiction does not discriminate.
It doesn’t discriminate against any demographic, any group. Again, it can’t
be confined to a single geographic region. It impacts young people. It impacts our older people, the lower income people, the middle-income people, and the higher income levels.
Those of us who have served our Nation
as our honored veterans, pregnant
women, and even newborn babies can
suffer from addiction.
The stories we hear when we are back
home visiting with our constituents,
talking with friends, talking with
neighbors, and then hearing these stories recounted on the floor—these are
heartbreaking stories that come from
all over the country, from the east
coast, again, all the way to the most
remote villages of Alaska. We have
seen and we have heard the pain that
opioid addiction causes. It is important
that we take action and that we address this issue now before it worsens.
Unfortunately, as we see the statistics,
that is where it is going, that is the
trend, and that is the direction.
The rates of addiction and hospitalization will only continue to skyrocket unless we can throttle this
back, unless we can get our hands
around it. This is our opportunity not
only to treat but to prevent opioid addiction. Lots of numbers have been discussed on the floor about this epidemic
that we are seeing, and the numbers
really are horrifying. In Alaska, the
mortality rates related to opioid and
heroin abuse have more than tripled
since 2008. In 2015, we had 33 Alaskans
die from heroin overdose—perhaps even
more that we just haven’t been able to
identify. The rates on inpatient hospitalization for heroin and opioid poisoning have nearly doubled since 2008.
The cost is over millions of dollars.
As we know, it is often our young
people who suffer from addiction the
most, and certainly the most directly.
Between 2008 and 2013, the rate of individuals between 21 and 29 years old
being admitted to treatment centers
has doubled. Again, we are talking
about numbers, and we are talking
about statistics. But we are really not.
We are talking about our friends, we
are talking about family, and we are
talking about neighbors. But we can
make a difference if we provide the resources and if we provide the education
and the outreach, not just to young
people but to all, so that they understand the dangers of opioid addiction.
Unfortunately, some of what we have
seen with this addiction is that somehow or another, opioids are viewed as
less a health threat because they are
prescription. What CARA does, what
this legislation in front of us does, is to
help address the educational need, provide States and communities with
grant options and resources to ensure
that all in the community—the educators, the parents, the doctors, other
members of the community—have the
knowledge and have the tools they
need to guide and support young people
and the community at large. But it is
just so hard; it has been so hard to see
families and friends lose their loved
ones to addiction.
Over the past several months in the
community of Juneau, our State capital, there have been a series of newspaper articles that have chronicled how
that community has been impacted by
the loss of young people due to heroin.
Six young people, all under the age of
30, were lost last year. In September, a
young man who was a softball player
lost his life due to heroin overdose.
Two weeks after that, another family
lost a son who was going to film
school.
You read the stories, you read the details about the lives of these young
people, who could be like any of us
until something happens. And what
that something is is an exposure to
opioids and an addiction that, again,
cuts a life short. Those parents of these
young people, as parents in States all
across the Nation, grieve for the loss of
their children and wonder what they
could have done to perhaps help save
their child’s life. Again, the community of Juneau is recounting that, but
it is all over our communities.
This drug addiction knows no boundaries. It seeps into and corrodes Alaska’s most remote and rural communities. These are communities, I will
remind you, where it is not like there
is easy access to them. These are communities—80 percent of the communities in the State of Alaska are not
connected by road. In order to get to
them, particularly this time of year,
the only way to get in is to fly in. It is
expensive to fly in. In the summer,
there are water options, but that too is
expensive. So while it is difficult for
people to move in and out, somehow or
another the drugs are coming in and
out. The heroin and the opioid addiction have found their way into these
remote communities, leaving families
and loved ones scrambling and desperate as they try to help those whom
they love.
Unfortunately, the resources we have
in terms of any form of treatment centers are so incredibly limited. In one of
the communities that is on the road
system, the community of Palmer, just
north of Anchorage, our largest city, I
was at an event this summer. Lots of
people wanted to talk to me at this picnic. There was a woman with her
daughter who was in her early
twenties, and that woman waited patiently, patiently, patiently to be able
to speak with me alone. She asked to
go off into a corner of the outdoor area
that we were in so that she could speak
to me about her daughter’s situation.
Her daughter was an addict. She had
been in and out of jail. She had been in
and out of treatment. Nothing had
worked, and this mother had no place
else to go, no place else for her daughter to go. So she, as one mom who
cared, was trying to help raise awareness of the lack of facilities, the lack
of treatment, and the lack of options
for so many in her situation. You listen to stories like that, and you realize
that we must attempt to do all we can.
Granted, we are sitting here in Washington, DC. The Federal Government
doesn’t always know what is best. We
know that for a fact, but how is it that
we can help these families, these communities, as they deal with, again, this
scourge that has afflicted so many?
We have had some good news in the
State of Alaska. Just this week, the
Alaska State House of Representatives
passed a bill that will remove civil liabilities for providing or administering
the drug naloxone to treat opioid and
heroin overdose. It was actually the
representative from Juneau, Representative Munoz, who spoke to the
need for reform and helped lead this
important measure. That is on its way
to the Governor’s desk. Again, I think
it is an important option for lifesaving
treatment.
As we work together—those of us
who have cosponsored the CARA bill
and all who have expressed their concern—we know we need to keep the
pressure on. We need to keep the momentum up to address this, not only in
Alaska but around the country, to
fight back, to deal with this addiction
we are seeing, and to really attack the
issue from every degree. From mental
health to criminal justice reform, community programs, educational resources, tools for veterans and pregnant women, addressing this widespread issue with a widespread response is important.
I thank my colleagues who have led
on this issue, and the Presiding Officer
here today has clearly done just that. I
thank the Presiding Officer for his
leadership on this.
As I have spoken this afternoon on
opioid addiction, and perhaps more specifically to heroin addiction, I always
VerDate Sep 11 2014 00:16 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00024 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.047 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
March 9, 2016 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1375
feel compelled to mention that in my
State, and particularly in Anchorage,
we have seen a spike of ‘‘spice’’ abuse.
This is a synthetic marijuana. More
and more, we are seeing individuals
who are being sent to the hospital. It is
our firefighters who seemingly are responding to more spice and more heroin incidents than they are responding
to fire calls. Recognizing that it is not
just heroin, but it is other drugs that
are truly wreaking havoc on our families and our communities, we need to
unite together to make a difference.
So I think what we are doing here in
this body is a first step. Passing this
legislation is an important response,
and through what we are doing, we can
work to change the direction in which,
unfortunately, we have been going.
With that, I yield the floor.
(At the request of Mr. REID, the following statement was ordered to be
printed in the RECORD.)
VOTE EXPLANATION
? Mrs. MCCASKILL. Mr. President, I
was necessarily absent for today’s cloture vote on S. 524, the Comprehensive
Addiction and Recovery Act of 2015. I
would have voted yea.?
Ms. MURKOWSKI. I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The legislative clerk proceeded to
call the roll.
Mr. COATS. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
SASSE). Without objection, it is so ordered.
WASTEFUL SPENDING
Mr. COATS. Mr. President, today
marks the 36th edition of my ‘‘Waste of
the Week.’’ For those who have been
listening I have been down here every
week, while the Senate is in session,
addressing what has been documented
as waste, fraud, and abuse.
I took on a major role when first
coming back to the Senate starting in
2011 to deal with the larger issue of our
plunge into debt through deficit spending year after year after year. Despite
numerous attempts, many of them bipartisan, all blocked by decisions made
at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, we have
not been able to put in place a reasonable plan—or any plan whatsoever—
that would reduce our spending, balance the budget and begin to chip away
at this ever-deepening cesspool of debt.
It is hurting our economy, and laying a
burden on future generations that will
have enormous negative consequences.
Given the fact that those larger efforts came to naught, I have decided to
start chipping away from the other end
of the fiscal spectrum to identify
waste, fraud, and abuse, a much more
efficient, effective Federal Government
and not waste taxpayer dollars that
these days are hard-earned and pretty
scarce.
This ‘‘Waste of the Week’’ deals with
not as substantive an issue as many of
these. The speeches talk about a whole
range of issues that are taking a lot of
taxpayer dollars out of the purses and
wallets of our constituents, sent to
Washington and simply wasted.
Every once in a while I try to present
something that is so ridiculous, so unnecessary, that it catches the public’s
attention and ought to embarrass
every Member of this body. Some arguments can be made about, well, perhaps
the Social Security Disability Trust
Fund could be adjusted so we wouldn’t
do this or that. But every fourth or
fifth time down here I like to throw
out something where people say: Are
you kidding me? We are actually using
our hard-earned tax dollars to do this?
One that caught the most attention
was the grant that amounted to hundreds of thousands of dollars to determine whether a massage made you feel
better after an expenditure of physical
effort. If they were asked that question, there is probably no one in America who would not conclude that. They
would say, yes, that works. I’d prefer a
massage over no massage at all. But
this grant was used to determine that.
Rather than take a human subject,
they used mechanical massages on the
backs of white rabbits. Actually, these
rabbits were from New Zealand. Then
they looked at the grin on the rabbit’s
face—I don’t know how they determined it. Rabbits can’t turn around
and say: Yes, that feels good. Apparently they made some kind of measurement, and after spending about
$400,000, came to the conclusion that,
yes, it really works. Well, that caught
people’s attention.
There are a lot of people who are outraged at the way we are spending their
money. There are people trying to
make their mortgage payment, trying
to get to the end of the week for the
next check, to buy groceries, or to set
aside money for their kids to go to
school.
This is one of those weeks where I
want to bring forward yet another
issue of ‘‘Can you believe this is how
the Federal Government is spending
your money?’’
I am told by my staff that there is a
new word around called ‘‘hangry.’’ It
means that if you are hungry, you tend
to get a little bit disjointed, and you
are more angry than you would be if
you were not hungry. I suppose that is
something we could easily prove by all
of us just asking: What is our disposition when we are hungry? Are we a little more tense or a little more quick to
trigger in terms of getting upset about
what someone may say to us or something like that—a little more irritable.
So this new generation has taken
this condition called hangry, which is
hungry and angry, and turned it into
the term ‘‘hangry.’’ The National
Science Foundation said: Well, we better find out whether this is true. So
they issued a $331,000 grant for researchers to study whether ‘‘hanger’’
actually occurs. If you get hungry, do
you end up feeling ‘‘hangry’’? That was
the question. So researchers issued a
$331,000 grant for the study on married
couples. Listen, you can’t make this
stuff up. They came up with the idea of
giving each spouse a voodoo doll, and if
they felt they were angry, they were to
take a pin and stick it into the voodoo
doll. They each had their own voodoo
doll. Like I said, you can’t make this
stuff up. It only cost $331,000.
So whenever a spouse made the other
spouse angry, the other spouse grabbed
the voodoo doll and grabbed a pin and
stuck it in. The conclusion was after a
3-year study and $331,000 spent—yup,
we proved it. ‘‘Hanger’’ occurs when
you are hungry.
There are some Senate pages who are
trying to hold back their laughter. I
see a lot of smiles on the faces of people in this Chamber saying: Surely,
this can’t be true. Surely, this is made
up. Surely, this is a spoof to try to
prove a point. This actually happened,
folks. This actually happened.
The serious part of this is that the
taxpayer paid for it. At a time when we
are trying to repair roads and bridges,
when we are trying to put money forward for health care research, when we
are dealing with terrorist issues to
make sure our national security is
strong, when our military is underfunded, when we are trying to deal
with all the issues of the day, we are
taking this money—and of all things
the National Science Foundation could
do, they do this.
We take the $331,000 and add it to our
ever-growing accumulation of documented waste, fraud, and abuse of taxpayer dollars. We have now risen to a
position of $157,591 million and change.
It is not small stuff. It adds up. This is
what your Federal Government is
doing, and we wonder why the American people are frustrated. We wonder
why they are angry when they hear
issues like this.
I am not trying to stoke the flames
and make the American people more
‘‘hangry.’’ I am simply trying to expose
this so we will be so embarrassed with
these kinds of things that people will
come down to this Chamber and offer
legislation to clean up this stuff. We
have already made some progress but
we can make more.
MIGRATION CRISIS IN EUROPE
Mr. President, I would like to reserve
some time to talk about something
that I think is very serious, to discuss
an issue that I think has an impact on
all of us, particularly our national security.
Last week NATO’s Supreme Allied
Commander, Gen. Philip Breedlove,
whom I have had the opportunity to
talk to a number of times, testified before the Senate Armed Services Committee about how he views the threats
facing us today and what the most serious threats are to the United States.
Featured among them was a serious
migration crisis that is destabilizing
our European allies. He said:
Europe faces the daunting challenge of
mass migration spurred by state instability
and state collapse. The influx of people is
VerDate Sep 11 2014 01:19 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00025 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.047 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
S1376 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 9, 2016
masking the movements of criminals, terrorists, and foreign fighters. Within this mix,
ISIS [or ISIL] . . . is spreading like a cancer,
taking advantage of paths of least resistance, threatening European nations and our
own [nation] with terrorist attacks.
Each day as we watch on television
or read in the papers, this migration
crisis continues to grow worse. Efforts
by the European Union to stem the
tide have failed to even slow down the
flow of refugees and migrants. These
repeated failures, now moving into its
second year, are threatening to break
the European Union apart as each
member country resorts to a ‘‘fortress
Europe’’ mentality, enforced by national means. These include new razor
wire barriers along internal EU borders. They encourage divergent national policies on refugee admissions
that make almost a mockery of EU
policy consensus or even common efforts.
The EU agreement on common borders—described as the Schengen Agreement of 1985—has been considered the
bedrock of European unity. If this fundamental agreement is crushed by the
unsupportable weight of hundreds of
thousands of desperate migrants, how
can the European Union itself be
saved? That is the question.
Many of our European friends are
asking that question. I was recently in
Munich at a security conference, and
representatives from all the European
nations were there. The No. 1 topic was
the flow of migration and the destabilization of Europe and the unity of
Europe, nations not abiding by their
earlier commitments to receive migrants, nations raising barriers and
building walls—whether they are razor
wire or concrete walls—around their
borders. It is creating a major crisis in
Europe.
The political stability and social cohesion of individual European states
are clearly under strain. We have seen
street riots and police suppression.
Growing hostility between citizens and
migrant groups is spreading like wildfire. Extremist political groups are
feeding on this chaos and further
threatening democratic institutions.
Even in Germany, an extremist rightwing, basically fascist party has grown
its population from zero 4 years ago to
15 percent to 20 percent today, taking
over in many places as the third largest party in Germany. We all know
that after key state elections this
weekend, this may be growing.
The latest EU effort to come to grips
with this enormous problem is continuing at a summit meeting this week
in Brussels, with attendance by Turkey. The draft agreement on the table
shows how desperate the Europeans
have become. Without discussing the
detailed items here, it is sufficient to
note that the central proposition under
consideration is this: a convoluted system to send some migrant refugees
from Greece back to Turkey in exchange for other migrants to be resettled directly from Turkey to European
countries. The United Nations High
Commissioner for Refugees and other
refugee organizations have denounced
this proposal as unworkable and illegal. Some EU countries, such as Hungary, have even promised to veto this
scheme.
Without entirely prejudging a proposal still under consideration, I nevertheless have to guess that even if it is
accepted and enacted, it is unlikely to
address meaningfully the real dimensions of this migration problem. Something else clearly has to be done. The
numbers that are coming in show an
ever-expanding number of migrants
seeking relief by taking treacherous
routes—many of them guided by criminal elements—into Europe and the European resistance and the instability
all of that has provided.
The draft EU-Turkey agreement does
include a commitment to pursue another idea, and that is what I want to
talk about on the floor this afternoon.
I have long advocated this as hopefully
a more workable condition; that is, to
create conditions in and near Syria
that will permit people to remain there
in humane conditions of relative safety
near their home country, within their
own culture. To my knowledge, European leaders as a group have not before
committed to pursue this solution, but
I have raised it with European leaders
personally. The response has often considered the caution that Europe would
not be willing to commit the resources
necessary for such a solution. I agree
that the resources required would be
considerable and that the political
courage required would be even greater, but, I have argued, what is the alternative? Until political leaders in
Europe, and here as well, see that creating safe areas in and near Syria is
the only possible solution to this migration crisis, the political courage and
vision to take it up will be absent. But
now, at least, the Europeans, having
failed at a number of other efforts to
address this destabilizing problem, are
talking about it.
It has always been clear to me that
such a solution is far beyond the capacity of Europe alone. It will require the
United States and other cooperating
powers to work with our European
partners to create areas in and near
Syria where Syrians can find safety
and humanitarian relief.
As difficult as this task sounds—and
surely it is—it has been done before.
There is a precedent here. The manner
in which the international community
eventually came to deal successfully
with the Bosnian war in the 1990s gives
us a useful template for how we can approach the safe-area task in Syria.
That template, derived from our Bosnia experience, includes two essential
components: the U.N. Security Council
and NATO, North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
First, we are going to have to have a
clear mandate from the U.N. Security
Council creating U.N.-designated safe
areas.
Secondly, the U.N. Security Council
would have to create a new U.N. protective force. ‘‘UNPROFOR’’ is the
term that was used in the Balkans. In
the Balkan example, that force was
comprised of 40,000 troops from 42 contributing countries. In Syria, I would
suggest that such a course would include most NATO countries and especially neighboring Islamic countries.
Russia should also be pressed to participate. NATO could take on primary
planning and organization tasks.
When I discussed this proposal with
Europeans, the first response has been
that no one is willing to put troops in
the field to fight this war. It is important to emphasize that this
UNPROFOR would not be in Syria to
fight the war; rather, it would exist to
protect the designated safe areas. The
force would have policing functions intended to protect and secure the borders and keep radical elements out or
under control. That was the model that
was put in place in the Balkans. It succeeded. There were some glitches,
there were some problems, but it succeeded.
Third, it is obvious that safe areas in
Syria would require rigidly enforced
no-fly zones authorized by the UNSC.
Mr. President, I have presided a number of times, and when the clerk turns
and discusses the timeframe—may I
ask whether I am under a time limitation? If so, I ask unanimous consent to
extend that for just a few moments.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. COATS. Mr. President, as I said,
it is obvious that safe areas in Syria
would require rigidly enforced no-fly
zones authorized by the U.N. Security
Council. I suggested that with its planning and leadership capabilities and
massive resources, NATO should take
on that job, as it did in the Balkans. In
this role, too, NATO must work creatively to bring in the regional powers
in a broad, coordinated effort under
NATO leadership.
Fourth, as in Bosnia, the U.N. must
mobilize a massive relief effort within
Syria led by the UNHCR and similar
humanitarian organizations.
The international community must
be willing to pay for this important humanitarian effort. We should call for
major contributions from the regional
states, European countries, and other
traditional donor countries long committed to the humanitarian crisis.
Dealing with so many refugees in
safe, humane conditions will be expensive, yes, but it cannot be more expensive than the costs already being borne
by those destination countries burdened with uncontrolled migration.
In the current discussions of Turkey,
the EU has offered 6 billion euros to
help them deal with refugees, and Turkey has reportedly demanded as much
as 20 billion euros. With such sums
being discussed—and they almost certainly are underestimates—the costs
for caring for these desperate people
humanely, in conditions of safety, and
VerDate Sep 11 2014 01:19 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00026 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.049 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
March 9, 2016 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1377
in or near their homeland, are easily
justified.
Far greater costs will be incurred if
this problem is not dealt with effectively. For example, a collapse of the
Schengen system and reimposition of
border controls in Europe—a process
now underway—could cost as much as
1.4 trillion euros over the next 10 years,
according to a recent European Commission report. This is the cost in reduced economic outlook for the region,
not including the costs for infrastructure and personnel if the Schengen system is abandoned.
In returning to where I began, the
extra security gained by such a solution is beyond price.
I strongly believe the time has now
come for us to press vigorously for the
safe-area solution to the migrant crisis. The problem is growing far worse
with each passing month. Efforts to
identify other solutions have failed,
and the safe-area proposal may be the
only one left standing. Those who are
discouraged by the admitted obstacles
and great difficulties in pursuing this
solution must simply be persuaded to
take it up with creativity, determination, courage, and leadership.
I have discussed this proposal directly with Vice President BIDEN, Secretary of State Kerry, Supreme Allied
Commander and NATO Commander
General Breedlove, and senior European leaders. The Vice President, based
on his own experience with the Balkan
wars, agrees that the Bosnia precedent
could be a useful guide. The general
agrees that there are sufficient resources if there is sufficient political
will. The European leaders I have spoken with agree that no other alternative is visible at this time. That they
included this idea in the negotiations
with Turkey is a positive sign. I intend
to keep these discussions going in coming days.
In conclusion, I am under no illusions
about how difficult this task would be
for either us or our allies. It is an enormous undertaking, and even when it
does not address the underlying conflict in Syria, which has so far defied
all of our best efforts, it is something
we must pursue. However, the continuing flow of millions of refugees and
migrants is completely unsustainable,
posing serious threats to our European
friends and ultimately to all of us.
I will continue to press for this and
talk to European leaders and others in
our country to see this as a necessary,
viable, and doable solution to a crisis
situation that is having enormous impacts on the stability of Europe and
even on the United States in terms of
this humanitarian crisis.
With that, I thank my colleague for
his patience and allowing me to conclude.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Rhode Island.
CLIMATE CHANGE
Mr. WHITEHOUSE. Mr. President, I
am on the floor for the 130th time in
my ‘‘Time to Wake Up’’ series urging
us to wake up to the threat of climate
change here.
Time and time again, peer-reviewed
science demonstrates that carbon pollution from burning fossil fuels is causing unprecedented climate and oceanic
changes. We see the effects already in
our farms, our forests, and our fisheries. Yet the Republican-controlled
Congress continues to hit the ‘‘snooze’’
button every time an alarm goes off.
Every major scientific society in our
country, upon examining the data, says
climate change is real and it is caused
by our carbon pollution. So do all of
our National Laboratories. So do our
leading home State universities. The
Presiding Officer is from Nebraska, so
let me read what the University of Nebraska says on its Web site: ‘‘Climate
change poses significant risks to Nebraska’s economy, environment, and
citizens.’’
Another quote: ‘‘The magnitude and
rapidity of the projected changes in climate are unprecedented.’’
The fundamental science of climate
change is settled, and the stakes of the
climate crisis loom large. In poll after
poll, Americans demonstrate they understand the connection between climate change and the role humans play
in affecting climate. A recent poll
shows that 64 percent of Americans
support enacting policies to address
climate change and 78 percent of Americans think Federal Government
should curb the release of greenhouse
gases.
In spite of the overwhelming science
demonstrating that climate change is
real and the growing awareness and determination of the American public to
do something about it, Congress continues to prevaricate. The reason is
simple: the power and threats of the
fossil fuel industry. But is this strategy, the fossil fuel industry strategy of
obstruction and denial, actually selfinjurious?
Let’s look at coal. The coal industry—longtime provider of inexpensive
yet dirty energy—is in economic decline. Between 2008 and 2014, coal production and consumption have decreased by 15 percent and 18 percent respectively. Analyses by the U.S. Energy Information Administration suggest 2015 U.S. coal production was likely down a further 10 percent, the lowest
level since 1986. Coal is losing its share
of the electricity market to natural
gas and to wind power. From 2002 to
2012, net generation from coal declined
by 22 percent and coal-fired electricity,
which just 15 years ago constituted 50
percent of the electricity on the grid,
now makes up only 33 percent, roughly,
and falling. Gas-fired powerplants generated more energy than coal in 7 of
the 12 months of 2015. Prior to 2015,
gas-fired electricity generation never
exceeded coal.
The top four U.S. coal companies—
Peabody Energy, Arch Coal, Cloud
Peak Energy, and Alpha Natural Resources—produce approximately half of
the domestic volume of coal in this
country. In the past 5 years, all four
companies’ stock prices have crashed.
According to a recent report from the
Niskanen Center, a Libertarian-leaning
think tank, the combined total revenue
of these top producers between 2010 and
2014 declined by approximately 18 percent.
Wall Street giant Goldman Sachs recently delivered more bad news for the
global coal market. According to its
analysis, ‘‘the industry does not require new investment given the ability
of existing assets to satisfy flat demand, so prices will remain under pressure as the deflationary cycle continues.’’
The coal industry seems divorced
from this reality. Consider what
Peabody’s CEO Gregory Boyce argued
in his company’s 2014 annual report:
‘‘[T]hermal coal consumption from the
low-cost U.S. regions . . . is likely to
increase 50 to 70 million tons over the
next 3 years as natural gas prices recover, demand from other regions is
displaced, and expected coal plant retirements are offset by higher plant
utilization rates.’’
Well, the Energy Information Administration disagrees, projecting thermal
coal demand growth of just 4 million
tons between 2012 and 2018. And remember, this was Peabody Energy’s CEO
speaking last week. Wyoming’s Star
Tribune reported that Peabody Energy’s senior lenders are recommending
that America’s largest coal company
file for bankruptcy, as Arch Coal, the
second largest coal miner in the United
States, did in January. Patriot Coal
Corporation, Walter Energy, and Alpha
Natural Resources have also all filed
for bankruptcy in the past year.
The fossil fuel strategy of political
obstruction for coal is looking more
and more like economic suicide.
In some corners, light is dawning.
Appalachian Power president and CEO
Charles Patton told a meeting of energy executives last fall that coal is
losing a long-term contest with natural
gas and renewables. He said this: ‘‘If we
believe we can just change administrations and this issue is going to go
away, we’re making a terrible mistake.’’
Well, what if there is an answer to
this terrible mistake that is also an answer to climate change. What if we
could reduce the amount of carbon pollution we dump into the atmosphere
and oceans while helping communities
to transition from coal-based economies to clean energy ones, helping coal
miners. More and more conservative
and libertarian economists are making
the case that the ailing coal industry
should embrace a fee on carbon.
The idea is simple. You levy a price
on the thing you don’t want—carbon
pollution—and you use the revenue to
pay for things you do want. Greg Ip,
chief economics commentator for the
Wall Street Journal wrote:
The most reliable way to limit the bushing
of fossil fuels is to alter market signals so as
VerDate Sep 11 2014 01:19 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00027 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.052 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
S1378 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 9, 2016
to divert demand toward cleaner sources of
energy or conservation. We know how to do
that: Put a price on carbon dioxide emissions
via a tax, or via tradeable emission allowances in a cap-and-trade system. Both
incentivize the market to find the least economically harmful way to reduce emissions.
Dr. Aparna Mathur of the conservative American Enterprise Institute
conducted an analysis with a colleague
from the Brookings Institution showing a carbon fee could reduce emissions, shore up the country’s fiscal outlook, and play an important role in
broader tax reform. Dr. Mathur points
out: ‘‘The fact that we understand better the burden of a carbon tax and how
to offset it for low-income households
should make us more likely to adopt
this policy, not less so.’’
In fact, even the fossil fuel industry
knows a carbon tax is an effective
mechanism to help shift toward a lowcarbon energy future. Six of the
world’s major oil and gas companies,
including BP Group and Royal Dutch
Shell, wrote the United Nations last
summer saying they could take faster
climate action if governments work together to put a proper price on the environmental and economic harms of
greenhouse gas emissions. Here is what
they said:
[W]e need governments across the world to
provide us with clear, stable, long-term ambitious policy frameworks. We believe that a
price on carbon should be a key element of
these frameworks.
Harvard Professor N. Gregory
Mankiw was chair of the Council of
Economic Advisers for President
George W. Bush, and he served as an
economic adviser to Republican Presidential nominee Mitt Romney. He
agrees: ‘‘The best way to curb carbon
emissions is to put a price on carbon.’’
With a robust price on carbon, Congress could help coal mining companies, help coal mine workers, and help
States and communities with significant coal mining activity. A carbon fee
could be used to help coal companies
by supplanting current taxes and fees
and funding carbon capture for existing
operating coal plants. A carbon fee
could help coal workers by retraining
them for high-paying jobs and providing pension and health care security
not available from bankrupted employers. A carbon fee can provide assistance
to coal mining communities to help
them transition through all the challenges I have described.
A report by David Bookbinder and
David Bailey of the Niskanen Center
said this:
The coal industry is facing terminal decline. . . . An unfettered chaotic decline of
the coal industry would create major social
and economic issues such as deep regional
unemployment and a multitude of unfunded
liabilities, particularly for coal-dependent
States.
They point out that there is a way to
solve these problems:
Compensation for the losers from government policy action is an important conservative principle.
It is in this spirit that I introduced,
along with Senator SCHATZ, the American Opportunity Carbon Fee Act of
last year. I call it a carbon fee because
none of the revenues would go to fund
Big Government. The bill is a simple
proposal to cut emissions while raising
over $2 trillion in revenue, all of which
would be returned to the American
people—no bigger government.
In addition to slashing the corporate
tax rate, which the revenues would let
us do, and providing families with tax
credits beginning at $1,000 per couple,
which the revenues also would allow us
to do, the bill would provide $20 billion
of flexible annual funding back to the
people through their States to be used
to help them through this inevitable
transition—this inevitable transition.
In coal-heavy States, this money could
make the difference for communities
that have been reliant on coal jobs.
Arthur Laffer, economic adviser to
President Reagan, called our bill a
‘‘game-changer.’’ He said of my proposal: ‘‘I applaud Senator Whitehouse’s
efforts to reduce carbon emissions
while simultaneously offsetting—
through pro-growth marginal tax rate
decreases—the harm done to the economy by the carbon tax.’’
I introduced my bill to start a conversation with Republicans on how
best to design a carbon fee to help the
economy. I would welcome the opportunity to sit down with any colleague
to discuss ways to improve our proposal.
The coal industry in particular has a
clear choice: either to keep fighting
climate action, keep obstructing, keep
their head in the sand, continue to be
truculent and obtuse until they crash
into more bankruptcy in that unfettered chaotic decline the Niskanen
Center predicts or they could embrace
a carbon fee and use it to provide for
coal communities, to provide for coal
workers, to provide for carbon recovery, and to provide for retirees burdened with unfunded pension obligations.
Mr. President, I have put a ladder
into the water, and I urge the coal industry, before it goes under, to grab
hold.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Michigan.
FILLING THE SUPREME COURT VACANCY
Mr. PETERS. Mr. President, our Nation’s Founders fought the British Empire to create an independent nation
governed by laws. They fought so their
children could be freed from the callous fiats of a monarchy on the other
side of the ocean.
Our Founders learned from the excesses and mistakes of European powers and came together to design a new
system of government, a carefully balanced system, one of distributed powers and responsibilities, checks and
balances. American schoolchildren
learn about the three coequal branches
of government and the unique roles
they play in maintaining that carefully
crafted balance of power.
A strong, independent, and fully
functioning judiciary is inseparable
from a healthy American democracy.
Our Founders wisely reached consensus
to create a system wherein the President designates judicial nominees and
the Senate provides advice and consent. This prevents undue influence or
control by either the White House or
the Congress over the Supreme Court.
Simply put, the Senate has a constitutional duty to provide timely consideration of any President’s Supreme Court
nominees.
Today, I would like to focus on three
distinct and complementary reasons
why we must fulfill this obligation.
First, we should examine the ample
historical records available to determine the intent of our Nation’s Founders. Second, we should look at the actual text of the Constitution and the
plain meaning of the words in the document we all agree represents the highest law in the land. Finally, we can
look at the Senate’s track record and
traditions when it comes to considering Supreme Court nominees.
As Senators, we raise our hand and
take a solemn oath to defend the Constitution of the United States and
faithfully discharge the duties of our
office. One of the core constitutionally
mandated duties of serving as a Senator is to advise and consent on Supreme Court nominees, and it is not
one we can take lightly.
We are fortunate that many of our
Nation’s forefathers were prolific writers who left us reams of documents
that now help us understand the debates and the discussions that led to
our current system of government.
Our Nation’s fourth President and
the youngest member of the Constitutional Convention, James Madison,
kept a record of the debates that occurred during those formative months
of our Nation in the summer of 1787. I
urge my colleagues to revisit this
record as they consider how to proceed
with our Nation’s next Supreme Court
nominee.
On June 4, 1787, James Wilson of
Pennsylvania—a signatory of the Declaration of Independence and a member
of the Continental Congress—argued
that justices should be appointed by
the executive branch alone and strongly opposed appointments made by the
Federal legislature. Madison disliked
the appointment of judges by the legislature but also wasn’t satisfied with a
unilateral Executive appointment. He
ultimately suggested that judicial appointments should be made by the Senate. This issue of judicial appointments
was debated vigorously and continued
over multiple sessions as delegates
traded proposals. Charles Pinckney of
South Carolina and Roger Sherman of
Connecticut opposed Wilson and pushed
for the legislative appointment of Justices.
Madison, however, moved us closer to
our present system by suggesting that
only the Senate should have the power
to appoint Justices to the Supreme
Court and not the House of Representatives.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 01:19 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00028 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.053 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
March 9, 2016 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1379
Nathaniel Gorham, a delegate from
Massachusetts, first introduced the
concept of appointment by the President with the advice and consent of the
Senate. This balanced approach resolved the concerns of delegates who
believed unilateral Presidential appointments bordered on monarchy,
while also addressing the concern that
legislative appointments were simply
too vulnerable to the fleeting parochial
interests that may dominate the discussion on any given day.
Months later, on September 7, 1787,
the delegates unanimously agreed on
the final language that governs the
nomination and confirmation of Supreme Court Justices to this day. Our
Founders’ focus on the appointment
and confirmation of the Supreme Court
Justices was not an academic exercise,
nor was it an intergovernmental turf
war. It was an iterative, deliberative
process with a clear goal: a strong and
independent judiciary.
Alexander Hamilton, probably the
most prolific of our Founders when it
comes to the written word, directly addressed the independence of the judiciary in The Federalist Papers. He argued: ‘‘Liberty can have nothing to
fear from the judiciary alone, but
would have everything to fear from its
union with either of the other departments.’’
Hamilton was concerned that a Supreme Court too heavily influenced by
Congress or the White House would not
adequately protect the rights and freedoms of the American people. He wrote
that an independent judiciary ‘‘will always be the least dangerous to the political rights of the Constitution; because it will be least in a capacity to
annoy or injure them.’’
Tying the hands of the Supreme
Court by keeping an empty seat on the
nine-member bench amounts to the
union between the departments that
Hamilton warned us about. Refusing to
even consider a Supreme Court nominee strengthens the Senate to the detriment of the executive and judicial
branches, throws off a carefully crafted
balance of power, and contravenes our
Founders’ intent. Some legal scholars,
Senators, and members of the judiciary
argue that intent is irrelevant and that
we should strictly construe the words
on the page.
Let’s look at the plain meaning of
the constitutional text. Article 3, section 1, states that ‘‘The judicial Power
of the United States, shall be vested in
one supreme Court, and in such inferior
Courts as the Congress may from time
to time ordain and establish.’’
While lower courts could be established by Congress, the Supreme Court
resolves issues between and among the
States. It is the highest Court in the
land, a Court of finality.
The Constitution specifically addresses the appointment of Justices to
the Supreme Court.
Article 2, section 2, states the President ‘‘shall nominate’’—and I repeat
‘‘shall nominate’’—‘‘and by and with
the Advice and Consent of the Senate,
shall’’—and I repeat ‘‘shall’’—‘‘appoint
Ambassadors, other public Ministers
and Consuls, Judges of the supreme
Court.’’
‘‘Shall’’ is not a word that is considered ambiguous. Its meaning hasn’t
evolved over time. It is not open for interpretation. It is not permissive in nature. It is instructive, and it is clear.
There are many modern-day issues
we face that our Founders could have
never imagined. We will grapple with
novel constitutional questions for as
long as this Nation exists. But the
question of how Supreme Court Justices are appointed is something our
Founders debated, decided, and they
enshrined in the Constitution.
The President is required to nominate a Justice, and the Senate has the
job of confirming or rejecting that appointment. If the Senate attempts to
undermine the President’s constitutional responsibility to nominate a
Justice and this body fails to provide
advice and consent on that nomination—well, we then have abdicated one
of the Senate’s most important and sacred constitutional obligations.
The Senate has a longstanding tradition of swiftly considering and confirming judicial nominees. Presidents
and the Senate have historically taken
their responsibility to fill the Supreme
Court very seriously, even when they
were at odds over who that nominee
may have been. I am surprised and also
disappointed that so many of my colleagues seem to be ignoring their constitutional obligations in a stark departure from the history of the U.S.
Senate.
According to the nonpartisan Congressional Research Service, since the
Judiciary Committee’s creation 200
years ago, they have typically reported
Supreme Court nominations that were
opposed by a committee majority to
allow the full Senate to make the final
decision on whether the nominee
should be confirmed.
Let me repeat this very important
fact. Even if a nominee was opposed in
committee, their nomination was still
brought to the floor of the Senate for a
vote.
Let’s also consider recent history.
Since 1975, the time from a President’s
formal nomination to hearing has averaged 42 days. The time from a nomination to committee vote has averaged 57
days. The time from a nomination to
floor vote has averaged 70 days.
The current vacancy we are dealing
with occurred 269 days before the 2016
election and with 342 days remaining in
President Obama’s term in office.
Without doing a whole lot of math, it
is safe to say that there is more than
enough time to nominate, consider,
and confirm a Supreme Court Justice
before the November election if we
move at a deliberate, average pace, on
par with what has existed for over four
decades.
If the Senate waits for a new administration before even considering a
nominee, we will be approaching a full
year with an empty seat on the highest
Court in the land. Not since the American Civil War has the Senate taken
longer than a year to fill a Supreme
Court vacancy.
There is a reason that Presidents and
the Senate work together and historically do not drag out Supreme Court
nominations: An eight-member Supreme Court simply cannot fully do its
job. The cases in which the Supreme
Court relies on having all nine Justices
to break a deadlock are often those
that are most contested. They involve
timely, novel legal issues and resolve
splits between Federal circuit courts.
Legal scholar Justin Pidot recently
cited Chief Justice William Rehnquist
regarding situations where the court of
appeals had arrived at different conclusions about the resolution of legal
issues. Rehnquist said: ‘‘Affirmance of
each of such conflicting results by an
equally divided Court would lay down
‘one rule in Athens, and another in
Rome,’ with a vengeance.’’
Over 30 constitutional law scholars
recently echoed that sentiment, writing: ‘‘A vacancy on the Court for a year
and a half likely would mean many instances where the Court could not resolve a split among the circuits. There
would be the very undesirable result
that the same federal law would differ
in meaning in various parts of the
country.’’
Federal law is just that: It is Federal.
We cannot have one interpretation of
Federal law in Michigan, Ohio, and
Kentucky and a whole different interpretation of law in Wisconsin, Illinois,
and Indiana.
Previous Presidents have weighed in
on the importance of a fully operational Court. President Reagan said:
‘‘Every day that passes with a Supreme
Court below full strength impairs the
people’s business in that crucially important body.’’
I know many of my colleagues in the
Senate revere President Reagan, and I
wish to repeat his important words
that have so much relevance to what
we are debating here today. He said:
‘‘Every day that passes with a Supreme
Court below full strength impairs the
people’s business in that crucially important body.’’
In fact, President Reagan was able to
make a Supreme Court appointment in
his final year in office. The Senate fulfilled its duties by providing timely
consideration of that nominee, Justice
Anthony Kennedy.
Forcing lower courts to serve as the
courts of last resort empowers congressionally created courts and weakens
the Supreme Court in a way that was
never intended by the Framers of the
United States Constitution.
I wish to remind my colleagues that
the Constitution allows Congress to decide how to organize the lower courts.
But the Constitution requires—it requires—the advice and consent of the
Senate for confirmation of Supreme
Court Justices. We must do our job so
that the Supreme Court can do theirs.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 01:19 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00029 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.055 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
S1380 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 9, 2016
The American people have elected
President Obama to office twice, and
he has a constitutional obligation and
clear authority to nominate a candidate to succeed Justice Scalia on the
Supreme Court.
The Senate has previously confirmed
six Supreme Court nominees in Presidential election years, including most
recently under President Reagan.
There is no reason we should not consider any nominee put forward by the
President with a fair hearing and a
vote. Each and every Member of this
body has the responsibility to thoroughly scrutinize and decide whether
or not to confirm the President’s nominee.
I ran for the U.S. Senate because of
my desire to serve the people of the
State of Michigan. I took an oath, as
did every Member of this body, swearing to defend the Constitution and
faithfully discharge the duties of our
office.
The Senate must honor the thoughtfulness of our country’s forefathers and
respect the independence of each of the
branches of our Nation’s government.
We must also respect the United States
Constitution. The role of the Supreme
Court is simply too important to our
democracy for the Senate to ignore the
Constitution and wait nearly a year to
do its job.
Members of this body must fulfill
their obligations. The Members of this
body must honor their duty and uphold
their constitutional oath. And the
Members of this body must fully consider and evaluate the qualifications of
any nominee the President submits.
I look forward to doing my own thorough review of the President’s nominee
and working with my colleagues to fulfill our essential constitutional duties.
Mr. President, I suggest the absence
of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
proceeded to call the roll.
Mr. ALEXANDER. Mr. President, I
ask unanimous consent that the order
for the quorum call be rescinded.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
FLAKE). Without objection, it is so ordered.
Mr. ALEXANDER. Mr. President, I
ask unanimous consent to speak as in
morning business.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH
Mr. ALEXANDER. Mr. President,
last year the law everybody wanted to
fix was named No Child Left Behind.
Despite many different opinions and
many different political attitudes, we
got it done. I give great credit to the
Senator from Washington, Mrs. PATTY
MURRAY, and to the members of our
Education Committee, 22 Senators of
widely divergent political views, for
their willingness to do that.
I often say if all you want to do is announce your opinion, you can do that
at home. You can stand on the street
corner and preach or you can get your
own radio program, but if you want to
be a U.S. Senator, after you announce
your opinion, you are supposed to get a
result, and that means work with other
people to identify common areas of interest and see if you can, and we were
able to do that with the bill that fixed
No Child Left Behind. Not only did we
reach a consensus that needed to be
fixed, we reached a consensus on how
to fix it. The President signed it on December 10. He called it a Christmas
miracle. It passed broadly in this body
and it had the effect of reversing the
trend toward a national school board,
of repealing the common core mandate,
and of, according to the Wall Street
Journal, being the largest devolution
of power from Washington to local control of schools in 25 years. So it was a
significant bill, and I would argue that
no bill that the Congress enacted last
year was more important.
This year, I would suggest that if we
are successful, that the most important bill that passes this body will be a
bill to advance biomedical research, a
companion bill to the 21st century
cures bill the House of Representatives
already passed. That is because this is
the opportunity that everybody wants
us to take. It is the opportunity to
take advantage of the tremendous advances in scientific discovery that have
created an environment where we have
opportunities to help virtually every
American.
We are able to cure some cancers instead of just treat cancers. Children
with cystic fibrosis are beginning to be
actually cured of their disease, a disease that was completely debilitating.
Remarkable advances are being made
because of genomic research. We have
exceptionally talented people in charge
of the agencies in dealing with this; for
example, Dr. Francis Collins with the
National Institutes of Health and now
the recently confirmed Dr. Califf at the
Food and Drug Administration. So this
is the best opportunity we have to
make a mark in the Senate this year to
help virtually every American, and we
have some catching up to do.
It is rare that I would admit the
House of Representatives is ahead of
us, but they are. They called their bill
the 21st century cures bill. We have a
common objective; that is, to get
cures, drugs, and treatments through
the regulatory process and the investment process more rapidly and into the
medicine cabinets of the doctors’ offices so they can help people. They finished their work last year. The President has taken the lead. He has called
for a Precision Medicine Initiative. It
is one of his major initiatives. I talked
with him about it last year. I said: Mr.
President, we will help you do that,
and the way to do it is through our
Biomedical Innovation Initiative. What
he wants to do, to begin with, is to get
a million genome sequenced so that
when the Senator from Arizona is
sick—which he rarely is, he is in such
good health—or I am sick, the doctor
may prescribe medicine that fits our
own individual genome and not just a
medicine that is, in effect, one-sizefits-all. That is just part of the excitement of precision medicine. And then
more recently the President has announced the Cancer Moonshot to try to
make further advances in that.
There is additional interest on both
sides of the aisle in a surge of new
funding for the National Institutes of
Health, possibly including mandatory
funding, if it is properly done, which
means replacing other mandatory funding. There is bipartisan interest in
that.
But none of that will happen unless
we move through our committee and
on to the floor and to a conference with
the House and on to the President’s
desk our biomedical research bill, our
companion bill to the 21st century
cures.
The only way to get support for the
President’s Precision Medicine Initiative, the only way to get the Cancer
Moonshot, the only way to get a surge
of funding that may include mandatory
funding for the NIH is to pass this bill.
Let’s be blunt about it.
The good news is, we are making
good progress. We are making good
progress. I wanted to report to the Senate that this morning we had our second markup, our second meeting of our
full committee where we discussed the
measure we have been working on for
more than a year for our biomedical innovation bill. We have come up with 50
bipartisan proposals that Members
have been working on to get patients
access to more drugs, cures, and treatments in a safe and effective way. We
have held 10 bipartisan hearings on our
innovation project, and 6 of those 10
hearings have been on an electronic
health care records system. That program, we found, was in a ditch. The
taxpayers have spent $30 million on it
to try to draw into it doctors and hospitals to use electronic medical records
so that you could take—so you know
what your records are and the doctors
could prescribe and diagnosis more easily. The problem was, it wasn’t done
very well. Stage one was helpful, most
of the hospitals and doctors said to me.
Stage two was difficult, and stage
three, in their words, was terrifying.
Precision medicine will not work unless we have an interoperable electronic health care records system that
has as its goal simplifying what happens in the doctor’s office or the patient’s bedroom in such a way—both
with devices and with data—that people can make sense of it. It will improve the practice of medicine. It will
reduce the huge amount of time doctors are spending on documentation.
Some doctors say they spend 40 or 50
percent of their time doing that. If
they are doing that, either they are
doing something wrong or the government is doing something wrong, and
my guess is we are. That is my guess.
So we set out this year to take several
steps to change that.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 01:19 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00030 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.056 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
March 9, 2016 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1381
The administration—and I will give
them credit—has gotten the message as
well, and they, including Dr. DeSalvo
and Secretary Burwell and Andy
Slavitt, the head of CMS, have made a
priority of trying to take this electronic medical records system and get
it back on track so that doctors and
physicians will see it as an opportunity
and not as a burden.
We have several steps in our legislation that will help make electronic
medical records work better. They include giving agencies more flexibility
for alliances like the VanderbiltGoogle partnership that was announced
the other day. They include dealing
with the privacy issues that occur
when you get a million genomes
sequenced. They include encouraging
interoperability and data sharing that
is essential to doing this. So we are all
working together to do that, but it will
be necessary to pass our bill for electronic medical records to move more
rapidly, and it will be necessary for the
electronic medical records system to
work if the President’s Precision Medicine Initiative is to work.
Last month we had a markup in our
committee where we considered 15 of
our bipartisan proposals and 7 bills,
and we passed them all. The bills will
mean better pacemakers for Americans
with heart conditions, better rehabilitation for stroke victims, more young
researchers entering the medical field,
and better access for doctors to their
patients’ medical records, as I just described. And for the parents of a child
suffering from a rare disease like cystic fibrosis, the bill from Senators BENNET, BURR, WARREN, and HATCH increases the chances that researchers
will find a treatment or cure for your
child’s disease. That was the good work
in the committee last month.
Today, we met all morning and we
considered 7 more bills, and about 15
more proposals were incorporated in
those bills. Each of those bills, the Senators feel, is an important step forward. For example, Senators CASEY,
ISAKSON, BROWN, and KIRK offered a
bill, which was passed, to create drugs
to treat or cure rare diseases in children.
Senators BURR, BENNET, HATCH, and
DONNELLY proposed, and it was passed,
to create a new system for breakthrough devices that is similar to the
breakthrough for drugs that Senator
BURR and Senator BENNET and others
worked on in 2012, and that has shown
such promise and such results. Everyone is pleasantly—I wouldn’t say surprised, but maybe surprised by how
many new drugs have been approved by
the FDA using the breakthrough process from 2012. We hope the same will be
true with the breakthrough process for
devices.
Senators BENNET and HATCH offered a
bill that will remove the uncertainty
in the definition of ‘‘medical devices’’
that was adopted in 1976. Most people
didn’t even know what software was in
1976.
Senators BURR, CASEY, ISAKSON, and
ROBERTS had a bill to spur the development to save the lives of victims of
bioterror.
Senators ISAKSON, CASEY, DONNELLY,
and ROBERTS offered a bill to prevent
the promising new field of combination
products from getting caught in redtape at the FDA. By combination products, I mean devices and drugs together.
A bill from Senators WICKER, KLOBUCHAR, BENNET, COLLINS, and
FRANKEN would increase the say patients would have in the FDA approval
process about treatments received in a
clinical trial.
Senators FRANKEN, NELSON, ISAKSON,
and BROWN had a bill to encourage
companies to develop a treatment,
cure, or vaccine for the Zika virus.
These were all adopted, but for these
to become law, we have to pass our bill.
We have to bring it to the floor this
year, and we have to do it in a bipartisan way and pass our bill.
At 3 markups—our third one will be
in April—we will consider 50 proposals,
and every single one of them has bipartisan support. There are two or three
areas where we have a difference of
opinion. I am glad to see the Senator
from Illinois is here because one of the
areas we discussed this morning is one
where he has been very important, and
that is to have a surge of additional
funding for the National Institutes of
Health. Numbers of us were very proud
of the work Senator MURRAY, Senator
BLUNT, Senator DURBIN, and others did
to make sure that we had $2 billion
more in the regular appropriations last
year for the National Institutes of
Health—very important.
A number of us believe that it would
be appropriate in connection with this
innovation legislation to have a surge
of additional funding for specific
projects at the National Institutes of
Health but not at the expense of a
steady increase in the regular discretionary funding. There are a variety of
reasons for that. I won’t go into them
all today because the Senator from Illinois may want to speak. But if we are
talking about mandatory funding,
mandatory funding is already out of
control, and the President’s new budget has $682 billion of mandatory funding in it. It also has new taxes to pay
for it, which the Congress isn’t going
to adopt. The more responsible proposal would be to reduce mandatory
funding by $682 billion.
In any event, if we have any mandatory funding, it needs to replace other
mandatory funding. And we don’t want
to create a situation where anyone gets
the idea that mandatory funding is a
substitute for steady increases in discretionary funding, which has happened before. As Senator BLUNT pointed out this week in our appropriations
hearing, when the Congress put in the
mandatory funding for community
health centers and the National Health
Service Corps, the discretionary funds
started to dry up.
So we have different proposals for
how to deal with this. The Democratic
Senators on our committee have recommended $50 billion over the next 10
years. I recommended an NIH innovation fund which would create a surge of
funding for high-priority initiatives at
NIH, including the President’s Precision Medicine Initiative, the Cancer
Moonshot, the BRAIN Initiative, Big
Biothink Awards, and a Young Investigator Corps. It would be in addition to
discretionary funds, not a replacement
for them.
So my hope is that Senator MURRAY
and I and our committee can work together over the next 2 or 3 weeks and
complete our work on our biomedical
research legislation by our markup on
April 6. I hope we can come to the floor
and present to Senator MCCONNELL, the
majority leader, along with that, a bipartisan consensus for an additional
surge of funding, including mandatory
funding for medical research in the
areas I have suggested. I have said that
we will need to replace other mandatory funding in order for it to be considered. I hope we can work that way
in the committee, and I hope the Senate will look forward to receiving this.
I will conclude by simply saying that
last year I believe no bill was more important that we worked on in the Senate than the bill to fix No Child Left
Behind. It affected 50 million children,
3.5 million teachers, and 100,000 public
schools. The only reason it happened
was because we had Senators of very
different backgrounds and attitudes
and political differences who agreed
that a result was more important. The
same here. The opportunity everybody
wants us to take this year is to take
advantage of this magnificent scientific revolution and encourage the
research and the other steps we need to
take to move treatments and cures and
drugs into the medicine cabinets and
the doctors’ offices more rapidly, in a
safe and effective way. I believe we can
do that. I hope our work is finished by
early April. I hope it is bipartisan.
I look forward to the opportunity of
being able to say later this year that
the most important bill the Senate
worked on with the House and the
President is this 21st century cures
idea. The House has done its job. The
President is out front. We need to
catch up. I am convinced we can.
I thank the Presiding Officer.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The Senator from Illinois.
Mr. DURBIN. Mr. President, having
followed my friend and colleague from
Tennessee, Senator ALEXANDER has
spelled out an exciting possibility, and
I know it won’t be easy. It is a heavy
political lift. But what he is talking
about is coming up with a dramatic
commitment of funds for medical research for the next 8, 9, or 10 years,
over and above the ordinary budget of
the National Institutes of Health.
We have sat down and talked about
this several times, and I wholeheartedly endorse not only his concept
VerDate Sep 11 2014 01:19 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00031 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.059 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
S1382 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 9, 2016
but also when he gets down to specifics. Some of the things he wants to
focus on, including the Moonshot for
Cancer, for example, is one, of course,
the President and the Vice President
and the vast majority of Americans
would endorse because there isn’t a single one of us who hasn’t been touched
by the threat or the actual disease of
cancer among our families and friends.
I won’t go through the entire list, but
whether we are dealing with the issues
involving the brain, including Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, neurological
issues—there are so many needs there,
and I wholeheartedly endorse what he
is setting out to do. On a bipartisan
basis, I will work with him and Senator
MURRAY and Senator BLUNT and Senator LINDSEY GRAHAM. We all share
these feelings, that this is something
that will be a legacy item for this Senate.
I thank the Senator from Tennessee
for his leadership and his cooperation
in building up the budget for the National Institutes of Health research
this year. The $2 billion will make a
difference. I thank the Senator for
being on the floor.
LEAD CONTAMINATION
Mr. President, I would like to address
a couple of issues.
The contaminated water crisis in
Flint, MI, is a wake-up call across
America. We have to have protections
in place when it comes to lead contamination. My heart goes out to people in Flint, MI, dealing with the consequences of this preventable, manmade crisis. The Senate needs to do
something to help the people of Flint.
We must also recognize that children
across America are poisoned every day
by lead, and we need to do something
about it to protect these families.
A Chicago Tribune reporter, Michael
Hawthorne, recently authored some articles on this issue, revealing hundreds
of cases of childhood lead poisoning
stemming from different sources in
Flint, such as lead-based paint in federally subsidized housing. That’s right—
housing we own as taxpayers, housing
we manage as the Federal Government,
and housing which is dangerous to the
children who are living there. Exposure
to high levels of lead poisoning can be
devastating to a child, causing irreparable damage. Because the children
who live in this housing are from lowincome families—many minority families—lead poisoning can further trap
these kids in the cycles of poverty, violence, and inequality. Families are
often stuck in the homes even after the
lead is discovered with no place to go.
That is why Senator MENENDEZ from
New Jersey and I joined together to
offer the Lead-Safe Housing for Kids
Act, to ensure safe and affordable housing by reducing the threat of lead exposure and lead poisoning. Congressional
Representatives KEITH ELLISON, MIKE
QUIGLEY from my State of Illinois,
BRENDA LAWRENCE, and DAN KILDEE
have introduced companion legislation
in the House.
Since the enactment of Federal lead
policies in the early 1990s, lead poisoning rates have fallen. This is a big
success story. However, the risk of lead
poisoning from lead-based paint hazards found in homes continues to
threaten kids who are living in homes
built before 1978. This is especially true
in Illinois. It is a problem in Cleveland,
Baltimore, Buffalo, Pittsburgh, and
many other cities.
HUD regulations are outdated, ineffective, and based on old scientific discoveries that haven’t been updated.
Under current HUD regulations, a landlord is not required to remediate a
home to make it safe where lead-based
paint hazards have been found until a
child’s blood lead level is 20
micrograms of lead per deciliter. That
standard from HUD is four times the
standard of the Centers for Disease
Control. When I asked Secretary Castro of Housing and Urban Development
why would we have such a disparity—
why would you allow lead contamination in a child four times the level of
what the Centers for Disease Control
says is acceptable? He said: I have no
answer, and we are going to change it.
It is just wrong. I salute him for acknowledging that, and I hope to help
him in any way I can to change this
regulation.
We also need better inspections. Inspections to qualify to be a part of a
Federal housing program are cursory
visual inspections. There is no way to
discover lead paint that can be dangerous to household members or kids
unless you have a thorough inspection.
In addition to that, once we discover
there is lead in the residence, we have
to find another place for the family to
live unless that lead can be remediated
quickly.
No one knows this better than Lanice
Walker. She moved out of public housing in 2012 and into a home with a
housing choice voucher. What an opportunity for her family—a new home.
Less than 5 months after she and her
family moved in, her 4-year-old daughter was diagnosed with lead poisoning.
Lanice was aware of the dangers of lead
in kids. She asked the Chicago Housing
Authority for permission to move.
They said no. Why? Because her daughter’s blood level hadn’t met the HUD
standard. It met the CDC standard,
which was one-fourth, but hadn’t met
the HUD standards. So despite her
daughter having a blood lead level
twice that of what the CDC considers
to be dangerous, they wouldn’t move
her out of her house. So she stayed.
Within the next year, another child in
the house was diagnosed with lead poisoning, too, and then another one. Before she moved out, all nine of Lanice’s
children had elevated blood lead levels.
Even so, she received permission to
move only after legal advocates intervened. This could have been avoided if
the home had been properly inspected.
Sadly, this isn’t an isolated incident.
Since 2012, in Chicago alone at least 180
kids in section 8 housing have fallen
victim to this mismatch in the blood
level standards. After hearing Lanice’s
story, the Chicago Housing Authority
said it would voluntarily recognize the
CDC guidelines, even though HUD
didn’t require them to. That is a good
step. However, families all across
America need the same relief that will
come when HUD standards are
changed. That is what this bill is all
about. I commend it to my colleagues
and hope they would look at it carefully in an effort to ensure that public
housing is safe.
What did we learn in Flint, MI? We
think 9,000 children were exposed to
the lead in the water that has had an
impact on them—for some, brain damage that cannot be reversed. Who will
answer for the poisoning of 9,000 children? How can we answer to the next
generation that faces this hazard if we
don’t take this important step?
We need to ensure that Federal lead
standards are updated in accordance
with the best available science, and
adopt primary prevention measures to
protect children from lead exposure in
low-income housing. That means aligning HUD standards with the CDC’s
standards and requiring a risk assessment before a family moves into a
home, and allowing mothers like
Lanice Walker to move her family
without the fear of losing assistance
when a lead hazard is identified.
We all know how destructive lead
poisoning is on children and our society. Yet, our federal policies are actually allowing young children to stay in
unsafe homes for months after they
have been diagnosed with lead poisoning. By updating HUD’s regulations,
we can protect the most vulnerable
children from the harmful, irreversible
effects of lead poisoning.
I hope my colleagues will join me in
this important effort. American children are depending on it, and they cannot afford to wait.
Mr. President, we have a bill before
us to deal with opioids and the heroin
crisis. It is a crisis that hit Illinois and
hit it hard. Across Illinois we suffered
from over 1,700 drug overdose deaths in
2014—a 30-percent increase over 2010; 40
percent were associated with heroin.
Last October in Chicago, in a weekend, we had 74 people die from
fentanyl-laced heroin overdoses in 72
hours. The Chicago metro area ranked
first in the country, sadly, for total
number of emergency department heroin visits. This is higher than New
York, which has three times the population. This epidemic demands our attention. We need a comprehensive solution.
First, look at Pharma flooding America with opioids such as OxyContin,
hydrocodone, and similar opioid products. In the last year, there was a calculation that there were some 14 billion opioid pills manufactured by pharmaceutical companies in America.
That is enough to give every adult person in America a 1-month prescription
of opioids. Naturally, everyone doesn’t
VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:04 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00032 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.060 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
March 9, 2016 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1383
need it, but they keep generating these
volumes because the demand is there—
not for medicinal purposes, sadly, but
for narcotic purposes. The pharmaceutical industry has a responsibility,
and doctors have a responsibility.
Those pills don’t move from the pharmaceutical companies to the end user
except with a doctor and a pharmacy in
most instances.
Many doctors are too loose in their
prescriptions when it comes to painkillers. They prescribe too many pills.
I guess somebody makes more money
that way, or maybe doctors are not
bothered on weekends that way, but,
sadly, it puts into circulation a lot of
medications that are not needed for
pain. Some pharmacies know exactly
what is going on as people walk in with
scrip after scrip for opioids. They fill
them without question. Many States
don’t have laws to monitor these sales.
Then comes the devastation of opioid
addiction followed by heroin addiction.
I have seen it across my State. There
isn’t a city too small or a suburb too
wealthy or any corner of my State that
hasn’t been touched by this crisis. It is
everywhere. Many of the kids that I
have seen at these roundtables who
have survived it and tell their heroic
stories of coming back from heroin addiction—you look in their eyes and
say: I would never have picked that kid
out of a high school class to be a heroin
addict. Some of them have been addicts
for years before they finally get the
treatment they need.
We need a comprehensive solution to
address this crisis. We must prevent
drug companies from flooding the market with excessive amounts of addictive pills. We must encourage the Drug
Enforcement Administration to use
their existing authority to keep unnecessary drugs off the market. We must
crack down on doctors who over-prescribe and pharmacies that over-dispense. We must remove barriers to substance use disorder treatments, which
is why Senator KING and I introduced
legislation ensuring that lower-income
patients suffering from substance
abuse disorders are able to get the care
they so desperately need. And we must
put our money where our mouth is. We
cannot expect real change to come
about through good intentions. We can
authorize all the programs we want,
issue all the directives we want, cite
all the statistics we want, but nothing
will change unless we give our Federal
agencies and local governments the resources necessary to tackle this complex problem head on.
This bill before us is a step in the
right direction. It requires the establishment of a Federal interagency task
force to develop best practices for pain
management and pain medication prescribing, creates a national drug
awareness campaign on the risks of
opioid abuse, and authorizes grants to
States, locals, and nonprofits to address opioid abuse and fund treatment
alternatives.
This bill could have a positive impact
on communities in need if we are able
to provide the necessary funding. That
is why in addition to supporting the
underlying bill I also strongly supported the amendment that Senator
SHAHEEN offered last week. That
amendment would have provided $600
million in emergency supplemental appropriations to address the heroin and
opioid abuse epidemic. These funds
would have helped ramp up law enforcement efforts, drug treatment and
enforcement programs, and prevention
programs through the Justice Department. They would have enhanced prescription drug monitoring programs.
They would have improved access to
medication assisted treatment services
to high-risk areas as well as support
school and community partnerships to
create safe and drug-free environments
and provide additional assistance to
States to help pay for prevention and
treatment care.
Unfortunately, Senator SHAHEEN’s
amendment was defeated when a majority of Republicans decided to vote
against it. If we fail to provide the
needed resources to help communities
and families in need, we may be back
here a year from now saying we should
have done more. Families in Illinois
and across the country can’t wait that
long.
I support both the Comprehensive
Addiction and Recovery Act and the
Shaheen amendment. But the bill
should also address some of the many
issues I have learned about at roundtable discussions in Illinois while talking to families, doctors, law enforcement, and those who have overcome
substance abuse addiction.
That is why I introduced several
amendments that would have helped
improve the underlying bill, from requiring greater consideration at FDA
before new opioids can come onto the
market, to creating incentives for
States to improve their prescription
drug monitoring programs, to removing existing barriers to substance
abuse treatment for lower-income patients, to requiring greater transparency on how many opioids are being
manufactured in the United States annually. I am disappointed that many of
these amendments will not receive a
vote this week, but I will continue
working with my colleagues in the
Senate to advance these important proposals.
Let me say that one of the things
that has helped is the fact that years
ago here in the U.S. Senate, two of my
colleagues who no longer serve really
did something historic. One was Paul
Wellstone of Minnesota, who passed
away in an airplane crash, and the
other, Pete Domenici, a retired Senator from New Mexico. They required
that every health insurance policy in
America cover two things that weren’t
covered by many: one, mental health
counseling and the other, substance
abuse treatment.
We built that into ObamaCare, so
when you buy a health insurance policy in America today, it covers substance abuse treatment as well as mental health counseling. Luckily for
many families, when their kids end up
being addicted, they can turn to their
health insurance, and their health insurance can help pay for substance
abuse treatment. We need other
sources, as well, when it comes to
treatment for Medicaid, but for those
who want to repeal ObamaCare and get
rid of it, that is another provision to
ask them about. Do they really want to
get rid of a requirement that health insurance policies cover mental health
counseling and substance abuse treatment? I think it is important that we
have it. I am not sure what we would
do without it.
The opioid abuse and heroin epidemic
is a national public health emergency
that requires a comprehensive response
coupled with the necessary funding to
actually make a difference. The
amendments I have filed, as well as the
Shaheen amendment, would make important improvements and provide
emergency funding to help families in
Illinois and across the country. Our
communities need us to come together
as partners to help solve this problem.
I hope we do not let them down.
FILLING THE SUPREME COURT VACANCY
Mr. President, I see my colleague
from Oklahoma is here. This is the last
statement I want to make, and it relates to the Supreme Court vacancy.
A group of historians and scholars
sent a letter to President Obama about
the Supreme Court vacancy occasioned
by the death of Justice Antonin Scalia.
The signers of the letter include Robert
Dallek, Doris Kearns Goodwin, David
M. Kennedy, Thomas E. Mann, Norman
Ornstein, Geoff Stone, and numerous
others.
The letter provides a helpful historical perspective on the decision by the
Senate Republican majority to refuse
any nominee to fill this vacancy a
hearing before the U.S. Senate—something that has never happened in the
history of the U.S. Senate.
The Senate Republicans have said to
keep that Scalia vacancy right where
it is—a 4-to-4 Supreme Court for at
least a year longer. We haven’t had a
vacancy in the Supreme Court for over
a year since the Civil War tore this Nation apart over 150 years ago.
This letter that has been sent to the
President will be shared here. It makes
clear that the actions that are being
called for by the Republican majority
are unprecedented—unprecedented.
They have never happened—the fact
that they would refuse to have a hearing for a nominee to fill the Scalia vacancy or a vote on that nominee.
One only has to go back to 1988, not
that long ago, when President Ronald
Reagan, a Republican outgoing President in the last year of his Presidency
sent a name to the U.S. Senate, then in
control by a Democratic majority, to
fill a vacancy on the Supreme Court.
Did the Democrats in the Senate in
1988 say to President Reagan: Oh, you
are a lameduck. You are going to be
VerDate Sep 11 2014 01:19 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00033 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.062 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
S1384 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 9, 2016
gone in a year. We will wait until after
the election. No. They said the Constitution requires President Reagan to
send the Senate a name, and it requires
the Senate to advise and consent, and
they did. They had a hearing and they
had a vote and Anthony Kennedy, a
Ronald Reagan appointee to the Supreme Court, was sent to the Supreme
Court by President Ronald Reagan
with the support of the Democratic
Senate majority. That is consistent
with the Constitution.
I hope we can return to that, and I
hope that future generations will judge
that this Senate under the control of
the Senate majority party is going to
live by the words of our Constitution.
As I mentioned, a number of prominent historians and scholars from
across the political spectrum sent a
letter to President Obama about the
current vacancy on the Supreme Court.
This letter provides a helpful historical perspective on the decision by Senate Republicans not to give any consideration to the forthcoming Supreme
Court nominee.
The letter begins by saying:
We express our dismay at the unprecedented breach of norms by the Senate majority in refusing to consider a nomination for
the Supreme Court made by a president with
11 months to serve in the position. . . .
It is standard practice when a vacancy occurs on the Supreme Court to have a president, whatever the stage in his term, nominate a successor and have the Senate consider it. And standard practice (with limited
exception) has been for the Senate, after
hearings and deliberation, to confirm the
president’s choice, regardless of party control, when that choice is deemed acceptable
to a Senate majority.
The letter notes that history is, ‘‘replete with instances where a vacancy
on the Supreme Court was filled during
a presidential election year.’’
This includes 1988 under President
Reagan; 1940 under President Roosevelt; 1932 under President Hoover;
1916 for two nominees named by President Wilson; and 1912 under President
Taft.
The letter also discusses how President Eisenhower used his recess appointment power in the presidential
election year of 1956 to appoint Justice
William Brennan. Eisenhower, a Republican, made that recess appointment on October 16 while the Senate
was under Democratic control.
The letter says, ‘‘there was no objection to Eisenhower’s use of the recess
appointment—there was instead a
widespread recognition that it was bad
to have a Supreme Court operate for
months without its full complement of
nine members.’’
The letter then shifts from the lessons of history to the logical fallacies
of the Republicans’ position that a
nominee of a so-called lameduck President should not be considered. Here’s
what it says:
If we accept the logic that decisions made
by ‘‘lame duck’’ presidents are illegitimate
or are to be disregarded until voters make
their choice in the upcoming election, that
begs both the questions of when lame duck
status begins (after all, a president is technically a ‘lame duck’ from the day of inauguration), and why senators up for reelection
at the same time should not recuse themselves from decisions until the voters have
decided whether to keep them or their partisans in office.
The letter ultimately concludes that,
‘‘the refusal to hold hearings and deliberate on a nominee at this level is
truly unprecedented and, in our view,
dangerous.’’
I hope my Republican colleagues
heed the words of these preeminent historians.
There will be real consequences if the
Senate fails to do its job and leaves a
Supreme Court vacancy open for an extended time.
As President Ronald Reagan said in
1987, quote, ‘‘Every day that passes
with a Supreme Court below full
strength impairs the people’s business
in that crucially important body.’’
Major legal and constitutional questions are constantly brought before the
Supreme Court for national resolution.
When a case ends up with a tie vote
among the Justices, the Supreme
Court’s ruling has no precedential impact and important questions go unresolved.
As Gregory Garre, former Solicitor
General under President George W.
Bush, recently said, ‘‘the prospect of
numerous 4–4 ties or dismissals would
be undesirable to the Court.’’
Millions of Americans are awaiting
resolution of the questions that are before the Court. It is not fair to leave
them twisting in the wind.
Consider the impact on the efforts of
law enforcement to protect our communities.
On February 23, four former United
States Attorneys wrote an op-ed in the
Cincinnati Enquirer.
They said:
For federal prosecutors, agents and criminal investigations, a year is a lifetime. We
have seen real threats, whether it is the heroin epidemic or the threat of ISIS recruitment, facing the people in our communities
each day. While law enforcement stands
ready to protect the public from those
threats, they need to know the rules of the
road.
The op-ed continues:
The Supreme Court is the ultimate arbiter
of the hardest and most important questions
facing law enforcement and our nation. Even
as we write today, unsettled legal questions
regarding search and seizure, digital privacy
and federal sentencing are either pending before the Supreme Court or headed there. It is
unfair and unsafe to expect good federal
agents, police and prosecutors to spend more
than a year guessing whether their actions
will hold up in court. And it is just as unfair
to expect citizens whose rights and liberties
are at stake to wait for answers while their
homes, emails, cell phones, records and activities are investigated.
We expect our law enforcement
agents and prosecutors to do their job
every day, even in election years. We
should expect Senators to do their jobs
as well and fill this Supreme Court vacancy.
Earlier this week, 356 constitutional
law scholars wrote a letter to the Senate, explaining that ‘‘a long term vacancy jeopardizes the Supreme Court’s
ability to resolve disputed questions of
federal law, causing uncertainty and
hampering the administration of justice across the country.’’
Justice Scalia, in a 2004 memorandum discussing the Supreme
Court’s recusal policy, noted the problems the Court faces when only eight
Justices hear a case. He said that when
the Court proceeds to hear a case with
eight Justices, it ‘‘rais[es] the possibility that, by reason of a tie vote, it
will find itself unable to resolve the
significant legal issue presented by the
case.’’ He then went on to note that
under the Supreme Court’s Statement
of Recusal Policy, ‘‘even one unnecessary recusal impairs the functioning of
the Court.’’
Why would the Senate purposefully
try to impair the functioning of the
Supreme Court by leaving it with only
eight Justices?
The Senate should do its job and consider a Supreme Court nominee so the
Court can function like it’s supposed
to. I urge my Republican colleagues to
do their job. Give the President’s nominee a hearing and a vote.
I yield the floor.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The majority leader.
f
MORNING BUSINESS
Mr. MCCONNELL. Mr. President, I
ask unanimous consent that the Senate be in a period of morning business,
with Senators permitted to speak
therein for up to 10 minutes each.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
f
ORPHAN DRUGS
Mr. HATCH. Mr. President, in light
of recognition of Rare Disease Day, I
wish to speak about orphan drug exclusivity and trade promotion authority.
Congress enacted the bipartisan Orphan Drug Act, ‘‘ODA’’, of 1983, Pub. L.
97–414, to address a longstanding unmet
need to develop new treatments,
diagnostics, and cures for rare diseases
and disorders. I am proud to be one of
the lead Senate sponsors of the ODA,
which was passed with overwhelming
bipartisan support. This act and the
Rare Diseases Act of 2002—which I also
championed—created financial incentives for the research and production of
orphan drugs, including 7 years of market exclusivity, tax credits, and research grants, and also established the
Orphan Products Board at FDA and the
Office of Rare Diseases under the National Institutes of Health.
The purpose of these acts was to encourage the development of new ‘‘orphan’’ treatments, diagnostics, and
cures for the millions of Americans
with rare disease who lacked access to
effective medicines because the existing incentives were insufficient to develop and market drugs for such small
groups of patients.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:04 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00034 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.063 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
March 9, 2016 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1385
The ODA has been enormously successful. Before Congress enacted the
ODA in 1983, the Food and Drug Administration, FDA, approved only 38 drugs
in the United States specifically to
treat orphan diseases. From the passage of the ODA in 1983 until May 2010,
the FDA approved 353 orphan drugs and
granted orphan designations to 2,116
compounds. As of 2010, 200 of the roughly 7,000 officially designated orphan
diseases have become treatable.
Yet, despite the benefits of these
policies, the incentives and access
guarantees found in the ODA are not
yet part of any free trade agreement
negotiations.
The Bipartisan Congressional Trade
Priorities and Accountability Act of
2015, or TPA, contain a number of negotiating objectives for the administration to follow. For example, the
TPA law’s negotiating objectives require that U.S. trade agreements provide a standard of intellectual property
rights protection that is similar to
that found in the United States, which
includes providing incentives for biopharmaceutical innovation that are
similar to those in the United States.
The language in the TPA law is necessarily broad, and although it does
not explicitly reference critical incentives for orphan drug development, I
want to make it clear that these incentives, including the 7-year market exclusivity at the heart of the ODA, are
consistent with the TPA law’s requirement that U.S. trade agreements provide a standard of intellectual property
protection that is similar to U.S. law.
This is especially important because
vital incentives for orphan drug development are lacking in many markets
outside the United States, hindering
the development of treatments,
diagnostics, and cures for rare diseases—particularly diseases endemic to
those markets. A lack of incentives for
orphan drug development in any one
country can have a very real impact on
the likelihood of investment into a research or cure for a given disease. Particularly in the case of ultra-rare diseases, those affecting fewer than 1 in
50,000 individuals, there may only be a
handful of patients around the world
who would benefit from a particular
treatment or cure, and removing a
number of them from the pool of potential patients may render investments
in these therapies untenable and could
drive up costs for rare disease patients
in the United States.
Therefore, I want to make it clear
that I believe it is appropriate for the
administration to negotiate ODA incentives and access guarantees, including the 7-year market exclusivity period, in future U.S. trade agreements
and that the intent of Congress is that
TPA’s negotiating objectives are consistent with that goal.
f
ARMS SALES NOTIFICATION
Mr. CORKER. Mr. President, section
36(b) of the Arms Export Control Act
requires that Congress receive prior notification of certain proposed arms
sales as defined by that statute. Upon
such notification, Congress has 30 calendar days during which the sale may
be reviewed. The provision stipulates
that in the Senate the notification of
proposed sales shall be sent to the
chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee.
In keeping with the committee’s intention to see that relevant information is available to the full Senate, I
ask unanimous consent to have printed
in the RECORD the notifications which
have been received. If the cover letter
references a classified annex, then such
annex is available to all Senators in
the office of the Foreign Relations
Committee, room SD–423.
There being no objection, the material was ordered to be printed in the
RECORD, as follows:
DEFENSE SECURITY
COOPERATION AGENCY,
Arlington, VA, March 9, 2016.
Hon. BOB CORKER,
Chairman, Committee on Foreign Relations,
U.S. Senate, Washington, DC.
DEAR MR. CHAIRMAN: Pursuant to the reporting requirements of Section 36(b)(1) of
the Arms Export Control Act, as amended,
we are forwarding herewith Transmittal No.
15–81, concerning the Department of the Air
Force’s proposed Letter(s) of Offer and Acceptance to Indonesia for defense articles
and services estimated to cost $95 million.
After this letter is delivered to your office,
we plan to issue a news release to notify the
public of this proposed sale.
Sincerely,
J.W. RIXEY,
Vice Admiral, USN, Director.
Enclosures.
TRANSMITTAL NO. 15–81
Notice of Proposed Issuance of Letter of
Offer Pursuant to Section 36(b)(1) of the
Arms Export Control Act, as amended
(i) Prospective Purchaser: Indonesia.
(ii) Total Estimated Value:
Major Defense Equipment* .............................. $ 80 million.
Other ................................................................ 15 million.
Total ............................................................. 95 million.
(iii) Description and Quantity or Quantities of Articles or Services Under Consideration for Purchase:
Major Defense Equipment (MDE):
Thirty-six (36) AIM–120C–7 Advanced Medium-Range Air-to-Air Missiles (AMRAAMs),
One (1) Missile Guidance Section.
Non-Major Defense Equipment (non-MDE):
Control section support equipment, spare
parts, services, integration activities, logistics, technical contractor engineering and
technical support, loading adaptors, technical publications, familiarization training,
test equipment, and other related elements.
(iv) Military Department: Air Force (X7–DYAB).
(v) Prior Related Cases, if any: None.
(vi) Sales Commission, Fee, etc., Paid, Offered, or Agreed to be Paid: None.
(vii) Sensitivity of Technology Contained
in the Defense Article or Defense Services
Proposed to be Sold: See Attached Annex.
(viii) Date Report Delivered to Congress:
March 9, 2016
* as defined in Section 47(6) of the Arms
Export Control Act.
POLICY JUSTIFICATION
Indonesia-AIM–120C–7 Advanced MediumRange Air-to-Air Missiles (AMRAAMs)
The Government of Indonesia has requested a possible sale of thirty-six (36) AIM–
120C–7 AMRAAMs and one (1) Missile Guidance Section. Also included in this possible
sale are; control section support equipment,
spare parts, services, logistics, technical
contractor engineering and technical support, loading adaptors, technical publications, familiarization training, test equipment, and other related elements. The total
estimated value of MDE is $80 million. The
overall total estimated value is $95 million.
This proposed sale contributes to the foreign policy and national security of the
United States by helping to improve the security of a key partner that has been, and
continues to be, an important force for political stability and economic progress in the
Asia-Pacific region.
The proposed sale improves Indonesia’s capability to deter regional threats and
strengthen its homeland defense. Indonesia
is able to absorb this additional equipment
and support into its armed forces.
The proposed sale of this equipment and
support does not alter the basic military balance in the region.
The prime contractor will be determined
by competition. There are no known offset
agreements proposed in connection with this
potential sale.
Implementation of this proposed sale will
not require the assignment of any U.S. Government or contractor representatives to Indonesia.
There will be no adverse impact on U.S. defense readiness as a result of this proposed
sale.
TRANSMITTAL NO. 15–81
Notice of Proposed Issuance of Letter of
Offer Pursuant to Section 36(b)(1) of the
Arms Export Control Act, as amended
Annex Item No. vii
(vii) Sensitivity of Technology
1. AIM–120C–7 Advanced Medium Range
Air-to-Air (AMRAAM) is a radar-guided missile featuring digital technology and microminiature solid-state electronics. AMRAAM
capabilities include look-down/shoot-down,
multiple launches against multiple targets,
resistance to electronic countermeasures,
and interception of high flying, low flying,
and maneuvering targets. The AMRAAM All
Up Round is classified CONFIDENTIAL.
Major components and subsystems are classified up to CONFIDENTIAL, and technology
data and other documentation are classified
up to SECRET.
2. If a technologically advanced adversary
were to obtain knowledge of the specific
hardware and software elements, the information could be used to develop countermeasures or equivalent systems that might
reduce weapon system effectiveness or be
used in the development of a system with
similar or advanced capabilities.
3. This sale is necessary in furtherance of
the U.S. foreign policy and national security
objectives outlined in the Policy Justification. Moreover, the benefits to be derived
from this sale, as outlined in the Policy Justification, outweigh the potential damage
that could result if the sensitive technology
were revealed to unauthorized persons.
4. All defense articles and services listed in
this transmittal have been authorized for release and export to Indonesia.
f
REMEMBERING JUSTICE ANTONIN
SCALIA
Mr. CASEY. Mr. President, today I
wish to remember Justice Antonin
VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:04 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00035 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.037 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
S1386 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 9, 2016
Scalia and thank him for his service to
the Supreme Court and the country.
Justice Scalia was a first-generation
American, and his life was a testament
to the American dream. A student of
history and the law, Antonin Scalia
had a commitment to public service
that culminated in his appointment as
an Associate Justice of the Supreme
Court by President Ronald Reagan in
1986.
Justice Scalia served on the Court
for almost 30 years and in that time
made many important contributions to
our legal system. While he had firm
convictions, he also loved people and
never let ideas get in the way of friendship, most notably with fellow Justice
Ruth Bader Ginsburg.
Senator Margaret Chase Smith once
said: ‘‘Public service must be more
than doing a job efficiently and honestly. It must be a complete dedication
to the people and to the nation.’’
Justice Scalia believed in that complete dedication. Our thoughts and
prayers remain with his family at this
time, and we thank him and them for
his service.
f
REMEMBERING SHANE N. YATES
Mr. PORTMAN. Mr. President, today
I wish to honor the life of Shane N.
Yates. Shane was the executive director of the Ohio Society of Association
Executives. Shane had a fierce commitment to his organization and his profession. Shane had a relentless drive to
serve all those he represented and lead
all whom he worked with.
Shane was a graduate of Ashland
University and earned his certificate in
nonprofit executive leadership from Indiana University. Shane was also a
chapter adviser for his fraternity, Phi
Kappa Psi; a past board member for
Meeting Professionals International
Ohio Chapter; and a volunteer for the
United Way of Central Ohio.
A passionate and high-energy executive with more than 15 years of
achievement in association leadership,
Shane was named a 40 Under 40 honoree
in 2014 by the Association Forum of
Chicagoland and USAE. While serving
as the director, Shane helped the Ohio
Society of Association Executives
achieve many milestones while never
settling with the status quo.
Shane N. Yates will forever leave a
mark on the Ohio Society of Association Executives and all who knew him.
f
ADDITIONAL STATEMENTS
TRIBUTE TO GORDON STONER
? Mr. DAINES. Mr. President, I rise
today to recognize Gordon Stoner, a
wheat grower from Outlook, MT, on his
newly elected position serving as the
president of the National Association
of Wheat Growers, NAWG.
Gordon comes from a long history of
farming, managing his own fourth-generation farm near Outlook. Stoner
Farms practices no-till farming techniques and grows lentils, corn, oil
seeds, flax, peas, and durum, a highprotein variety of hard wheat that is a
rare crop raised in select parts of the
world.
Gordon has expressed enthusiasm
about NAWG’s plan to partner with organizations in an effort known as the
National Wheat Action Plan to help
come up with new strategies for bringing the wheat industry back to increased profitability.
Gordon has also served in leadership
roles with his church, Montana Grain
Growers Association, served as chairman of U.S. Wheat Associates Joint
International Trade Policy Committee
and as director and chairman of
NAWG.
Our great State depends on farmers,
ranchers, and producers who contribute
greatly to the flourishing of our rural
communities. On behalf of Montana, I
thank Gordon Stoner for his paramount leadership and look forward to
seeing the positive impact he continues
to have on the wheat industry.
f
?
TRIBUTE TO DR. MARK FOLEY
? Mr. SESSIONS. Mr. President, today
I wish to recognize Dr. Mark Foley,
who has served with great distinction
and honor at the University of Mobile
for more than 17 years. Dr. Foley has
served as president of the University of
Mobile since 1998 and is the third president of the university since its founding in 1961. He will be retiring from his
post on July 31, 2016.
Dr. Foley came to the University of
Mobile during a critical transitional
time and led the school through a period of significant growth. Under his
guidance, the university has flourished.
Facilities have been updated, the
school is on more solid financial footing, and programs and the stature of
the university have improved.
During his time at the University of
Mobile, Dr. Foley led the university to
invest $44.8 million in capital projects,
including a recent $7 million campus
enhancement program that thoroughly
revitalized the campus. Under Dr. Foley’s leadership, the university gained
national recognition from U.S. News &
World Report, America’s Best Christian Colleges, America’s Best College
Buys, and many more.
Dr. Foley helped to integrate a Christian worldview into all aspects of academics, campus life, and university operations at this quality Baptist-affiliated institution. The university now
has more than 1,500 students enrolled
in over 40 undergraduate and graduate
programs.
A former truckstop operator, Dr.
Foley was ordained as a Baptist minister in 1990 after receiving his master
of divinity degree from the New Orleans seminary. He received his doctorate from that same institution in
1992 and completed postdoctoral studies in education. Though the university
was struggling with a variety of financial problems when Dr. Foley took over
in 1998, he turned the school around.
The University of Mobile has continued
to thrive under Dr. Foley’s tenure.
As a native of Mobile, AL, it has been
my honor to work with Dr. Foley and
witness the great accomplishments he
has achieved at the University of Mobile. His hard work and genuine passion for higher education is apparent
and the students of the University of
Mobile will miss his leadership. I would
like to take this opportunity to thank
him for all he has done for the university, for Mobile, and for Alabama.
I thank the Chair.
f
?
REMEMBERING SHILOH FOREST
SUNDSTROM
? Mr. WYDEN. Mr. President, today I
wish to recognize the contribution of a
young Oregonian whose life was cut far
too short, but whose impact will stay
with my State forever.
Shiloh Forest Sundstrom, a young
leader in the field of conservationbased rural development, was tragically killed by a hit-and-run driver in
November at age 34.
Shiloh was a child of Oregon. He was
born in the coastal mountains of western Lane County and lived much of his
life enjoying all that rural upbringing
had to offer. He loved the horses and
cows on his parents’ ranch and attended school in the small town of
Mapleton.
A gifted student, Shiloh was his high
school class valedictorian in 2000 and
was accepted to Brandeis University.
As an undergraduate, he spent a semester abroad at the School for Field
Studies in Kenya, where he saw that
the struggles of rural communities in
Kenya paralleled the problems facing
rural Oregon communities.
Studying the ways in which the
Maasai people of Kenya struggled to
balance their efforts to maintain a traditional resource-based economy while
benefiting from wildlife conservation
and tourism, Shiloh saw that the positive lessons being learned there could
be applied back home in Oregon.
After graduating with honors from
Brandeis, Shiloh came back to his beloved Oregon for his master’s degree in
forestry at Oregon State University.
He then moved to the geography department to work toward a doctorate
and returned to Kenya several times to
pursue his research.
However, Shiloh was much more than
a gifted student. He had the rare ability to take his research out of the
classroom and work to implement positive change in the broader world. His
work with the Siuslaw Institute,
founded by his father John Sundstrom,
and with the Siuslaw Watershed Council, injected a reasonable approach to
often contentious natural resource
issues, always with a focus on positive
outcomes.
Shiloh always strived for success
through collaboration—what I like to
call the Oregon way. He was involved
VerDate Sep 11 2014 01:19 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00036 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.035 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
March 9, 2016 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1387
in the Rural Voices for Conservation
Coalition, RVCC, a network that seeks
common ground between diverse interests on conservation-based challenges
facing rural areas in the West.
Shiloh’s deep ties to rural Oregon,
his stellar scholarship, and his worldwide experience gave him a uniquely
powerful voice in demonstrating that
conservation and economic development can go hand in hand.
The powerful outpouring of sadness
at his death shows how deeply Shiloh
impacted his community. The lessons
that he taught and his leadership will
not be forgotten. Shiloh’s thoughtful,
collaborative approach, his love of the
land, and his dreams of a better world
will live on in everyone he touched in
the short time we were blessed to know
him.?
f
EXECUTIVE AND OTHER
COMMUNICATIONS
The following communications were
laid before the Senate, together with
accompanying papers, reports, and documents, and were referred as indicated:
EC–4664. A communication from the Director of the Regulatory Management Division,
Environmental Protection Agency, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Fluopyram; Pesticide Tolerances’’
(FRL No. 9943–21–OCSPP) received in the Office of the President of the Senate on March
8, 2016; to the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry.
EC–4665. A communication from the Director of the Regulatory Management Division,
Environmental Protection Agency, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Approval and Promulgation of Air
Quality Implementation Plans; New Mexico;
and Albuquerque/Bernalillo County; Revisions to Establish Small Business Stationary
Source Technical and Environmental Compliance Assistance Programs’’ (FRL No. 9943–
43–Region 6) received in the Office of the
President of the Senate on March 8, 2016; to
the Committee on Environment and Public
Works.
EC–4666. A communication from the Director of the Regulatory Management Division,
Environmental Protection Agency, transmitting, pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled ‘‘Air Plan Approval; Ohio; Base Year
Emission Inventories for the 2008 8-Hour
Ozone Standard’’ (FRL No. 9943–46–Region 5)
received in the Office of the President of the
Senate on March 8, 2016; to the Committee
on Environment and Public Works.
EC–4667. A communication from the Chief
of the Branch of Recovery and State Grants,
Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of the
Interior, transmitting, pursuant to law, the
report of a rule entitled ‘‘Endangered and
Threatened Wildlife; Designation of Critical
Habitat for Lower Columbia Coho Salmon
and Puget Sound Steelhead; Final Rule’’
(RIN1018–BB28) received in the Office of the
President of the Senate on March 2, 2016; to
the Committee on Environment and Public
Works.
EC–4668. A communication from the Administrator of the Environmental Protection
Agency, transmitting, pursuant to law, a report entitled ‘‘Third Report to Congress:
Highlights of the Diesel Emissions Reduction
Program’’; to the Committee on Environment and Public Works.
EC–4669. A communication from the Assistant Secretary for Legislation, Department of
Health and Human Services, transmitting,
pursuant to law, the fiscal year 2015 report of
the Department of Health and Human Services’ Federal Coordinated Health Care Office;
to the Committee on Finance.
EC–4670. A communication from the Acting
Assistant Secretary, Bureau of PoliticalMilitary Affairs, Department of State, transmitting, pursuant to law, an addendum to a
certification of the proposed sale or export of
defense articles and/or defense services to a
Middle East country (OSS–2016–0323); to the
Committee on Foreign Relations.
EC–4671. A communication from the Acting
Assistant Secretary, Bureau of PoliticalMilitary Affairs, Department of State, transmitting, pursuant to law, an addendum to a
certification of the proposed sale or export of
defense articles and/or defense services to a
Middle East country (OSS–2016–0324); to the
Committee on Foreign Relations.
EC–4672. A communication from the Assistant Administrator, Bureau for Legislative
and Public Affairs, U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID), transmitting, pursuant to law, the Agency’s response
to the GAO report entitled ‘‘WATER AND
SANITATION ASSISTANCE: USAID Has Increased Strategic Focus but Should Improve
Monitoring’’; to the Committee on Foreign
Relations.
EC–4673. A communication from the Regulations Coordinator, Centers for Medicare
and Medicaid Services, Department of
Health and Human Services, transmitting,
pursuant to law, the report of a rule entitled
‘‘Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act; HHS Notice of Benefit and Payment Parameters for 2017’’ ((RIN0938–AS57) (CMS–
9937-F)) received in the Office of the President of the Senate on March 7, 2016; to the
Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and
Pensions.
f
PETITIONS AND MEMORIALS
The following petitions and memorials were laid before the Senate and
were referred or ordered to lie on the
table as indicated:
POM–133. A petition by a citizen from the
State of Texas urging the United States Congress to propose, for ratification by special
conventions held within the individual
states, an amendment to the United States
Constitution which would require that at
least one of the two houses of Congress approve, by majority vote of all members elected and serving in that body, a reprieve or
pardon granted by the President of the
United States to a person earlier having been
properly found guilty of committing an offense against the United States; to the Committee on the Judiciary.
POM–134. A petition by a citizen from the
State of Texas urging the United States Congress to propose, for ratification by special
conventions held within the individual
states, an amendment to the United States
Constitution which would authorize Congress, by a simple majority vote in both
houses thereof, to nullify an Executive Order
of the President; to the Committee on the
Judiciary.
f
REPORTS OF COMMITTEES
The following reports of committees
were submitted:
By Mr. BARRASSO, from the Committee
on Indian Affairs, without amendment:
S. 1443. A bill to amend the Indian Employment, Training and Related Services Demonstration Act of 1992 to facilitate the ability of Indian tribes to integrate the employment, training, and related services from diverse Federal sources, and for other purposes
(Rept. No . 114–225).
f
EXECUTIVE REPORT OF
COMMITTEE
The following executive report of a
nomination was submitted:
By Mr. ALEXANDER for the Committee
on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions.
*John B. King, of New York, to be Secretary of Education.
*Nomination was reported with recommendation that it be confirmed subject to the nominee’s commitment to
respond to requests to appear and testify before any duly constituted committee of the Senate.
f
INTRODUCTION OF BILLS AND
JOINT RESOLUTIONS
The following bills and joint resolutions were introduced, read the first
and second times by unanimous consent, and referred as indicated:
By Mr. CARDIN (for himself and Ms.
COLLINS):
S. 2655. A bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to improve the historic rehabilitation tax credit, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Finance.
By Mr. MARKEY (for himself and Mr.
BLUMENTHAL):
S. 2656. A bill to prohibit air carriers from
imposing fees that are not reasonable and
proportional to the costs incurred by the air
carriers, and for other purposes; to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation.
By Mr. KIRK (for himself, Mr. WARNER,
and Mr. GARDNER):
S. 2657. A bill to require consultations on
reuniting Korean Americans with family
members in North Korea; to the Committee
on Foreign Relations.
By Mr. THUNE (for himself, Mr. NELSON, Ms. AYOTTE, and Ms. CANTWELL):
S. 2658. A bill to amend title 49, United
States Code, to authorize appropriations for
the Federal Aviation Administration for fiscal years 2016 through 2017, and for other
purposes; to the Committee on Commerce,
Science, and Transportation.
By Mr. BURR (for himself, Mrs. CAPITO, Mr. TILLIS, and Mr. HELLER):
S. 2659. A bill to reaffirm that the Environmental Protection Agency cannot regulate
vehicles used solely for competition, and for
other purposes; to the Committee on Environment and Public Works.
f
SUBMISSION OF CONCURRENT AND
SENATE RESOLUTIONS
The following concurrent resolutions
and Senate resolutions were read, and
referred (or acted upon), as indicated:
By Mr. MENENDEZ (for himself, Mr.
KIRK, Mr. DURBIN, Mr. SCHUMER, Mrs.
BOXER, Mrs. SHAHEEN, Mr. MURPHY,
Mr. WYDEN, Mr. CASEY, Mr. WHITEHOUSE, Mr. REED, Mr. PETERS, Mr.
DONNELLY, Mr. RUBIO, and Mr.
BROWN):
S. Res. 394. A resolution recognizing the
195th anniversary of the independence of
Greece and celebrating democracy in Greece
and the United States; to the Committee on
Foreign Relations.
By Mr. ENZI (for himself, Mr. MENENDEZ, and Ms. AYOTTE):
S. Res. 395. A resolution supporting the
designation of March 2016, as ‘‘National
VerDate Sep 11 2014 01:19 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00037 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.041 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
S1388 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 9, 2016
Colorectal Cancer Awareness Month’’; considered and agreed to.
f
ADDITIONAL COSPONSORS
S. 553
At the request of Mr. CORKER, the
name of the Senator from New Mexico
(Mr. HEINRICH) was added as a cosponsor of S. 553, a bill to marshal resources
to undertake a concerted, transformative effort that seeks to bring an
end to modern slavery, and for other
purposes.
S. 591
At the request of Mr. BLUNT, the
name of the Senator from Mississippi
(Mr. COCHRAN) was added as a cosponsor of S. 591, a bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to permanently extend the new markets tax
credit, and for other purposes.
S. 911
At the request of Mr. CASEY, the
name of the Senator from Louisiana
(Mr. VITTER) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 911, a bill to direct the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration to issue an order with respect
to secondary cockpit barriers, and for
other purposes.
S. 1455
At the request of Mr. MARKEY, the
name of the Senator from New Jersey
(Mr. MENENDEZ) was added as a cosponsor of S. 1455, a bill to provide access to
medication-assisted therapy, and for
other purposes.
S. 1597
At the request of Mr. WICKER, the
name of the Senator from Alaska (Ms.
MURKOWSKI) was added as a cosponsor
of S. 1597, a bill to enhance patient engagement in the medical product development process, and for other purposes.
S. 1715
At the request of Mr. HOEVEN, the
name of the Senator from Maine (Ms.
COLLINS) was added as a cosponsor of S.
1715, a bill to require the Secretary of
the Treasury to mint coins in commemoration of the 400th anniversary of
the arrival of the Pilgrims.
S. 1795
At the request of Mr. VITTER, the
name of the Senator from Mississippi
(Mr. COCHRAN) was added as a cosponsor of S. 1795, a bill to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to provide tax
relief for major disasters declared in
any of calendar years 2012 through 2015,
to make certain tax relief provisions
permanent, and for other purposes.
S. 1890
At the request of Mr. HATCH, the
names of the Senator from Virginia
(Mr. WARNER), the Senator from
Vermont (Mr. LEAHY) and the Senator
from Iowa (Mr. GRASSLEY) were added
as cosponsors of S. 1890, a bill to amend
chapter 90 of title 18, United States
Code, to provide Federal jurisdiction
for the theft of trade secrets, and for
other purposes.
S. 2067
At the request of Mr. WICKER, the
name of the Senator from Florida (Mr.
NELSON) was added as a cosponsor of S.
2067, a bill to establish EUREKA Prize
Competitions to accelerate discovery
and development of disease-modifying,
preventive, or curative treatments for
Alzheimer’s disease and related dementia, to encourage efforts to enhance detection and diagnosis of such diseases,
or to enhance the quality and efficiency of care of individuals with such
diseases.
S. 2147
At the request of Mr. PORTMAN, the
name of the Senator from North Dakota (Mr. HOEVEN) was added as a cosponsor of S. 2147, a bill to amend the
Employee Retirement Income Security
Act of 1974 and the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986 with respect to participant
votes on the suspension of benefits
under multiemployer plans in critical
and declining status.
S. 2226
At the request of Ms. AYOTTE, the
name of the Senator from Mississippi
(Mr. COCHRAN) was added as a cosponsor of S. 2226, a bill to amend the Public Health Service Act to reauthorize
the residential treatment programs for
pregnant and postpartum women and
to establish a pilot program to provide
grants to State substance abuse agencies to promote innovative service delivery models for such women.
S. 2426
At the request of Mr. GARDNER, the
name of the Senator from Washington
(Mrs. MURRAY) was added as a cosponsor of S. 2426, a bill to direct the Secretary of State to develop a strategy to
obtain observer status for Taiwan in
the International Criminal Police Organization, and for other purposes.
S. 2441
At the request of Mr. FLAKE, his
name was added as a cosponsor of S.
2441, a bill to provide that certain
Cuban entrants are ineligible to receive refugee assistance, and for other
purposes.
S. 2468
At the request of Mr. TESTER, the
name of the Senator from New Mexico
(Mr. HEINRICH) was added as a cosponsor of S. 2468, a bill to require the Secretary of the Interior to carry out a 5-
year demonstration program to provide
grants to eligible Indian tribes for the
construction of tribal schools, and for
other purposes.
S. 2473
At the request of Mr. SULLIVAN, the
name of the Senator from Iowa (Mr.
GRASSLEY) was added as a cosponsor of
S. 2473, a bill to direct the Secretary of
Veterans Affairs to carry out a pilot
program to provide veterans the option
of using an alternative appeals process
to more quickly determine claims for
disability compensation, and for other
purposes.
S. 2487
At the request of Mrs. BOXER, the
name of the Senator from Iowa (Mr.
GRASSLEY) was added as a cosponsor of
S. 2487, a bill to direct the Secretary of
Veterans Affairs to identify mental
health care and suicide prevention programs and metrics that are effective in
treating women veterans as part of the
evaluation of such programs by the
Secretary, and for other purposes.
S. 2596
At the request of Mr. HELLER, the
name of the Senator from Hawaii (Ms.
HIRONO) was added as a cosponsor of S.
2596, a bill to amend title 10, United
States Code, to permit veterans who
have a service-connected, permanent
disability rated as total to travel on
military aircraft in the same manner
and to the same extent as retired members of the Armed Forces entitled to
such travel.
S. 2621
At the request of Mr. MARKEY, the
name of the Senator from Connecticut
(Mr. BLUMENTHAL) was added as a cosponsor of S. 2621, a bill to amend the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act
with respect to genetically engineered
food transparency and uniformity.
At the request of Mr. MERKLEY, the
names of the Senator from Massachusetts (Mr. MARKEY) and the Senator
from California (Mrs. BOXER) were
added as cosponsors of S. 2621, supra.
S. 2645
At the request of Mrs. SHAHEEN, the
names of the Senator from Washington
(Mrs. MURRAY) and the Senator from
Hawaii (Mr. SCHATZ) were added as cosponsors of S. 2645, a bill to impose
sanctions with respect to foreign persons responsible for gross violations of
internationally recognized human
rights against lesbian, gay, bisexual,
and transgender individuals, and for
other purposes.
S. RES. 349
At the request of Mr. ROBERTS, the
names of the Senator from West Virginia (Mrs. CAPITO) and the Senator
from Connecticut (Mr. MURPHY) were
added as cosponsors of S. Res. 349, a
resolution congratulating the Farm
Credit System on the celebration of its
100th anniversary.
S. RES. 383
At the request of Mr. PERDUE, the
name of the Senator from Virginia (Mr.
KAINE) was added as a cosponsor of S.
Res. 383, a resolution recognizing the
importance of the United States-Israel
economic relationship and encouraging
new areas of cooperation.
S. RES. 391
At the request of Mr. ROBERTS, the
names of the Senator from North Carolina (Mr. TILLIS), the Senator from
Georgia (Mr. ISAKSON) and the Senator
from Pennsylvania (Mr. TOOMEY) were
added as cosponsors of S. Res. 391, a
resolution expressing the sense of the
Senate to oppose the transfer of foreign
enemy combatants from the detention
facilities at United States Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, to the
United States homeland.
AMENDMENT NO. 3411
At the request of Mr. TESTER, the
name of the Senator from Maine (Mr.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 01:19 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00038 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A09MR6.009 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
March 9, 2016 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1389
KING) was added as a cosponsor of
amendment No. 3411 intended to be proposed to S. 524, a bill to authorize the
Attorney General to award grants to
address the national epidemics of prescription opioid abuse and heroin use.
AMENDMENT NO. 3435
At the request of Mr. SCHATZ, the
name of the Senator from Wisconsin
(Ms. BALDWIN) was added as a cosponsor of amendment No. 3435 intended to
be proposed to S. 524, a bill to authorize the Attorney General to award
grants to address the national
epidemics of prescription opioid abuse
and heroin use.
f
SUBMITTED RESOLUTIONS
SENATE RESOLUTION 394—RECOGNIZING THE 195TH ANNIVERSARY
OF THE INDEPENDENCE OF
GREECE AND CELEBRATING DEMOCRACY IN GREECE AND THE
UNITED STATES
Mr. MENENDEZ (for himself, Mr.
KIRK, Mr. DURBIN, Mr. SCHUMER, Mrs.
BOXER, Mrs. SHAHEEN, Mr. MURPHY, Mr.
WYDEN, Mr. CASEY, Mr. WHITEHOUSE,
Mr. REED, Mr. PETERS, Mr. DONNELLY,
Mr. RUBIO, and Mr. BROWN) submitted
the following resolution; which was referred to the Committee on Foreign
Relations:
S. RES. 394
Whereas the people of ancient Greece developed the concept of democracy, in which
the supreme power to govern was vested in
the people;
Whereas the founding fathers of the United
States, many of whom read Greek political
philosophy in the original Greek language,
drew heavily on the political experience and
philosophy of ancient Greece in forming the
representative democracy of the United
States;
Whereas Petros Mavromichalis, the former
Commander in Chief of Greece and a founder
of the modern Greek state, said to the citizens of the United States in 1821, ‘‘It is in
your land that liberty has fixed her abode
and . . . in imitating you, we shall imitate
our ancestors and be thought worthy of them
if we succeed in resembling you.’’;
Whereas the Greek national anthem, the
‘‘Hymn to Liberty’’, includes the words,
‘‘most heartily was gladdened George Washington’s brave land’’;
Whereas the people of the United States
generously offered humanitarian assistance
to the people of Greece during their struggle
for independence;
Whereas Greece heroically resisted Axis
forces at a crucial moment in World War II,
forcing Adolf Hitler to change his timeline
and delaying the attack on Russia;
Whereas Winston Churchill said, ‘‘if there
had not been the virtue and courage of the
Greeks, we do not know which the outcome
of World War II would have been’’ and ‘‘no
longer will we say that Greeks fight like heroes, but that heroes fight like Greeks’’;
Whereas hundreds of thousands of the people of Greece were killed during World War
II;
Whereas Greece consistently allied with
the United States in major international
conflicts throughout the 20th century;
Whereas Greece is a strategic partner and
ally of the United States in bringing political stability and economic development to
the volatile Balkan region, having invested
billions of dollars in the countries of the region and having contributed more than
$750,000,000 in development aid for the region;
Whereas the Government and people of
Greece actively participate in peacekeeping
and peace-building operations conducted by
international organizations, including the
United Nations, the North Atlantic Treaty
Organization, the European Union, and the
Organization for Security and Co-operation
in Europe;
Whereas Greece received worldwide praise
for its extraordinary handling during the
2004 Olympic Games of more than 14,000 athletes and more than 2,000,000 spectators and
journalists, a feat the government and people of Greece handled efficiently, securely,
and with hospitality;
Whereas Greece, located in a region where
Christianity meets Islam and Judaism,
maintains excellent relations with Muslim
countries and Israel;
Whereas European Council President Donald Tusk stated during a press conference in
Athens on February 16, 2016, ‘‘The migratory
crisis we are currently witnessing is testing
our Union to its limits. And Greece is among
the most affected countries. It is no coincidence that the Greek citizens on the islands
have been nominated to the Nobel Peace
Prize for their generosity in helping people
in need.’’;
Whereas the Government of Greece has
taken important steps in recent years to further cross-cultural understanding, rapprochement, and cooperation in various
fields with Turkey, and has also improved its
relations with other countries in the region,
including Israel, thus enhancing the stability of the wider region;
Whereas the governments and people of
Greece and the United States are at the forefront of efforts to advance freedom, democracy, peace, stability, and human rights;
Whereas those efforts and similar ideals
have forged a close bond between the people
of Greece and the United States; and
Whereas it is proper and desirable for the
United States to celebrate March 25, 2016,
Greek Independence Day, with the people of
Greece and to reaffirm the democratic principles from which those two great countries
were founded: Now, therefore, be it
Resolved, That the Senate—
(1) extends warm congratulations and best
wishes to the people of Greece as they celebrate the 195th anniversary of the independence of Greece;
(2) expresses support for the principles of
democratic governance to which the people
of Greece are committed; and
(3) notes the important role that Greece
has played in the wider European region and
in the community of nations since gaining
its independence 195 years ago.
f
SENATE RESOLUTION 395—SUPPORTING THE DESIGNATION OF
MARCH 2016, AS ‘‘NATIONAL
COLORECTAL CANCER AWARENESS MONTH’’
Mr. ENZI (for himself, Mr. MENENDEZ, and Ms. AYOTTE) submitted the
following resolution; which was considered and agreed to:
S. RES. 395
Whereas colorectal cancer is the second
leading cause of cancer death among men
and women combined in the United States;
Whereas, in 2016, more than 134,000 individuals in the United States will be diagnosed
with colorectal cancer and approximately
49,000 more will die from it;
Whereas colorectal cancer is one of the
most preventable forms of cancer because
screening tests can find polyps that can be
removed before becoming cancerous;
Whereas screening tests can detect
colorectal cancer early, which is when treatment works best;
Whereas the Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention estimates that if every individual aged 50 or older had regular screening
tests, as many as 60 percent of deaths from
colorectal cancer could be prevented;
Whereas the 5-year survival rate for patients with localized colorectal cancer is 90
percent, but only 39 percent of all diagnoses
occur at that stage;
Whereas colorectal cancer screenings can
effectively reduce the incidence of colorectal
cancer and mortality, but 1 in 3 adults between the ages of 50 and 75 are not up to date
with recommended colorectal cancer screening;
Whereas public awareness and education
campaigns on colorectal cancer prevention,
screening, and symptoms are held during the
month of March each year; and
Whereas educational efforts can help provide to the public information on methods of
prevention and screening, as well as symptoms for early detection: Now, therefore, be
it
Resolved, That the Senate—
(1) supports the designation of March 2016,
as ‘‘National Colorectal Cancer Awareness
Month’’ and the goals and ideals of that
Month; and
(2) encourages the people of the United
States to observe National Colorectal Cancer
Awareness Month with appropriate awareness and educational activities.
f
AMENDMENTS SUBMITTED AND
PROPOSED
SA 3449. Mr. FRANKEN submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed to
amendment SA 3369 submitted by Mr. CORNYN (for himself and Mr. ALEXANDER) and intended to be proposed to the bill S. 524, to
authorize the Attorney General to award
grants to address the national epidemics of
prescription opioid abuse and heroin use;
which was ordered to lie on the table.
f
TEXT OF AMENDMENTS
SA 3449. Mr. FRANKEN submitted an
amendment intended to be proposed to
amendment SA 3369 submitted by Mr.
CORNYN (for himself and Mr. ALEXANDER) and intended to be proposed to
the bill S. 524, to authorize the Attorney General to award grants to address
the national epidemics of prescription
opioid abuse and heroin use; which was
ordered to lie on the table; as follows:
At the end, add the following:
TITLE IX—COMPREHENSIVE JUSTICE AND
MENTAL HEALTH ACT
SEC. 901. SHORT TITLE.
This title may be cited as the ‘‘Comprehensive Justice and Mental Health Act of 2015’’.
SEC. 902. FINDINGS.
Congress finds the following:
(1) An estimated 2,000,000 individuals with
serious mental illnesses are booked into jails
each year, resulting in prevalence rates of
serious mental illness in jails that are 3 to 6
times higher than in the general population.
An even greater number of individuals who
are detained in jails each year have mental
health problems that do not rise to the level
of a serious mental illness but may still require a resource-intensive response.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 01:19 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00039 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A09MR6.011 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
S1390 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 9, 2016
(2) Adults with mental illnesses cycle
through jails more often than individuals
without mental illnesses, and tend to stay
longer (including before trial, during trial,
and after sentencing).
(3) According to estimates, almost 3/4 of jail
detainees with serious mental illnesses have
co-occurring substance use disorders, and individuals with mental illnesses are also
much more likely to have serious physical
health needs.
(4) Among individuals under probation supervision, individuals with mental disorders
are nearly twice as likely as other individuals to have their community sentence revoked, furthering their involvement in the
criminal justice system. Reasons for revocation may be directly or indirectly related to
an individual’s mental disorder.
SEC. 903. SEQUENTIAL INTERCEPT MODEL.
(a) REDESIGNATION.—Section 2991 of the
Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act
of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 3797aa) is amended by redesignating subsection (i) as subsection (n).
(b) SEQUENTIAL INTERCEPT MODEL.—Section
2991 of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe
Streets Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 3797aa) is
amended by inserting after subsection (h)
the following:
‘‘(i) SEQUENTIAL INTERCEPT GRANTS.—
‘‘(1) DEFINITION.—In this subsection, the
term ‘eligible entity’ means a State, unit of
local government, Indian tribe, or tribal organization.
‘‘(2) AUTHORIZATION.—The Attorney General may make grants under this subsection
to an eligible entity for sequential intercept
mapping and implementation in accordance
with paragraph (3).
‘‘(3) SEQUENTIAL INTERCEPT MAPPING; IMPLEMENTATION.—An eligible entity that receives a grant under this subsection may use
funds for—
‘‘(A) sequential intercept mapping, which—
‘‘(i) shall consist of—
‘‘(I) convening mental health and criminal
justice stakeholders to—
‘‘(aa) develop a shared understanding of
the flow of justice-involved individuals with
mental illnesses through the criminal justice
system; and
‘‘(bb) identify opportunities for improved
collaborative responses to the risks and
needs of individuals described in item (aa);
and
‘‘(II) developing strategies to address gaps
in services and bring innovative and effective programs to scale along multiple intercepts, including—
‘‘(aa) emergency and crisis services;
‘‘(bb) specialized police-based responses;
‘‘(cc) court hearings and disposition alternatives;
‘‘(dd) reentry from jails and prisons; and
‘‘(ee) community supervision, treatment
and support services; and
‘‘(ii) may serve as a starting point for the
development of strategic plans to achieve
positive public health and safety outcomes;
and
‘‘(B) implementation, which shall—
‘‘(i) be derived from the strategic plans described in subparagraph (A)(ii); and
‘‘(ii) consist of—
‘‘(I) hiring and training personnel;
‘‘(II) identifying the eligible entity’s target
population;
‘‘(III) providing services and supports to reduce unnecessary penetration into the criminal justice system;
‘‘(IV) reducing recidivism;
‘‘(V) evaluating the impact of the eligible
entity’s approach; and
‘‘(VI) planning for the sustainability of effective interventions.’’.
SEC. 904. VETERANS TREATMENT COURTS.
Section 2991 of the Omnibus Crime Control
and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 3797aa)
is amended by inserting after subsection (i),
as so added by section 903, the following:
‘‘(j) ASSISTING VETERANS.—
‘‘(1) DEFINITIONS.—In this subsection:
‘‘(A) PEER TO PEER SERVICES OR PROGRAMS.—The term ‘peer to peer services or
programs’ means services or programs that
connect qualified veterans with other veterans for the purpose of providing support
and mentorship to assist qualified veterans
in obtaining treatment, recovery, stabilization, or rehabilitation.
‘‘(B) QUALIFIED VETERAN.—The term ‘qualified veteran’ means a preliminarily qualified
offender who—
‘‘(i) served on active duty in any branch of
the Armed Forces, including the National
Guard or Reserves; and
‘‘(ii) was discharged or released from such
service under conditions other than dishonorable.
‘‘(C) VETERANS TREATMENT COURT PROGRAM.—The term ‘veterans treatment court
program’ means a court program involving
collaboration among criminal justice, veterans, and mental health and substance
abuse agencies that provides qualified veterans with—
‘‘(i) intensive judicial supervision and case
management, which may include random and
frequent drug testing where appropriate;
‘‘(ii) a full continuum of treatment services, including mental health services, substance abuse services, medical services, and
services to address trauma;
‘‘(iii) alternatives to incarceration; and
‘‘(iv) other appropriate services, including
housing, transportation, mentoring, employment, job training, education, and assistance
in applying for and obtaining available benefits.
‘‘(2) VETERANS ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—The Attorney General,
in consultation with the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, may award grants under this
subsection to applicants to establish or expand—
‘‘(i) veterans treatment court programs;
‘‘(ii) peer to peer services or programs for
qualified veterans;
‘‘(iii) practices that identify and provide
treatment, rehabilitation, legal, transitional, and other appropriate services to
qualified veterans who have been incarcerated; and
‘‘(iv) training programs to teach criminal
justice, law enforcement, corrections, mental health, and substance abuse personnel
how to identify and appropriately respond to
incidents involving qualified veterans.
‘‘(B) PRIORITY.—In awarding grants under
this subsection, the Attorney General shall
give priority to applications that—
‘‘(i) demonstrate collaboration between
and joint investments by criminal justice,
mental health, substance abuse, and veterans service agencies;
‘‘(ii) promote effective strategies to identify and reduce the risk of harm to qualified
veterans and public safety; and
‘‘(iii) propose interventions with empirical
support to improve outcomes for qualified
veterans.’’.
SEC. 905. PRISON AND JAILS.
Section 2991 of the Omnibus Crime Control
and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 3797aa)
is amended by inserting after subsection (j),
as so added by section 904, the following:
‘‘(k) CORRECTIONAL FACILITIES.—
‘‘(1) DEFINITIONS.—
‘‘(A) CORRECTIONAL FACILITY.—The term
‘correctional facility’ means a jail, prison, or
other detention facility used to house people
who have been arrested, detained, held, or
convicted by a criminal justice agency or a
court.
‘‘(B) ELIGIBLE INMATE.—The term ‘eligible
inmate’ means an individual who—
‘‘(i) is being held, detained, or incarcerated
in a correctional facility; and
‘‘(ii) manifests obvious signs of a mental
illness or has been diagnosed by a qualified
mental health professional as having a mental illness.
‘‘(2) CORRECTIONAL FACILITY GRANTS.—The
Attorney General may award grants to applicants to enhance the capabilities of a correctional facility—
‘‘(A) to identify and screen for eligible inmates;
‘‘(B) to plan and provide—
‘‘(i) initial and periodic assessments of the
clinical, medical, and social needs of inmates; and
‘‘(ii) appropriate treatment and services
that address the mental health and substance abuse needs of inmates;
‘‘(C) to develop, implement, and enhance—
‘‘(i) post-release transition plans for eligible inmates that, in a comprehensive manner, coordinate health, housing, medical,
employment, and other appropriate services
and public benefits;
‘‘(ii) the availability of mental health care
services and substance abuse treatment services; and
‘‘(iii) alternatives to solitary confinement
and segregated housing and mental health
screening and treatment for inmates placed
in solitary confinement or segregated housing; and
‘‘(D) to train each employee of the correctional facility to identify and appropriately
respond to incidents involving inmates with
mental health or co-occurring mental health
and substance abuse disorders.’’.
SEC. 906. ALLOWABLE USES.
Section 2991(b)(5)(I) of the Omnibus Crime
Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42
U.S.C. 3797aa(b)(5)(I)) is amended by adding
at the end the following:
‘‘(v) TEAMS ADDRESSING FREQUENT USERS OF
CRISIS SERVICES.—Multidisciplinary teams
that—
‘‘(I) coordinate, implement, and administer
community-based crisis responses and longterm plans for frequent users of crisis services;
‘‘(II) provide training on how to respond
appropriately to the unique issues involving
frequent users of crisis services for public
service personnel, including criminal justice,
mental health, substance abuse, emergency
room, healthcare, law enforcement, corrections, and housing personnel;
‘‘(III) develop or support alternatives to
hospital and jail admissions for frequent
users of crisis services that provide treatment, stabilization, and other appropriate
supports in the least restrictive, yet appropriate, environment; and
‘‘(IV) develop protocols and systems among
law enforcement, mental health, substance
abuse, housing, corrections, and emergency
medical service operations to provide coordinated assistance to frequent users of crisis
services.’’.
SEC. 907. LAW ENFORCEMENT TRAINING.
Section 2991(h) of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C.
3797aa(h)) is amended—
(1) in paragraph (1), by adding at the end
the following:
‘‘(F) ACADEMY TRAINING.—To provide support for academy curricula, law enforcement
officer orientation programs, continuing
education training, and other programs that
teach law enforcement personnel how to
identify and respond to incidents involving
persons with mental health disorders or cooccurring mental health and substance abuse
disorders.’’; and
(2) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(4) PRIORITY CONSIDERATION.—The Attorney General, in awarding grants under this
VerDate Sep 11 2014 01:19 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00040 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A09MR6.015 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
March 9, 2016 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1391
subsection, shall give priority to programs
that law enforcement personnel and members of the mental health and substance
abuse professions develop and administer cooperatively.’’.
SEC. 908. FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT TRAINING.
Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Attorney General
shall provide direction and guidance for the
following:
(1) TRAINING PROGRAMS.—Programs that
offer specialized and comprehensive training,
in procedures to identify and appropriately
respond to incidents in which the unique
needs of individuals who have a mental illness are involved, to first responders and
tactical units of—
(A) Federal law enforcement agencies; and
(B) other Federal criminal justice agencies
such as the Bureau of Prisons, the Administrative Office of the United States Courts,
and other agencies that the Attorney General determines appropriate.
(2) IMPROVED TECHNOLOGY.—The establishment of, or improvement of existing, computerized information systems to provide
timely information to employees of Federal
law enforcement agencies, and Federal
criminal justice agencies to improve the response of such employees to situations involving individuals who have a mental illness.
SEC. 909. GAO REPORT.
Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General
of the United States, in coordination with
the Attorney General, shall submit to Congress a report on—
(1) the practices that Federal first responders, tactical units, and corrections officers
are trained to use in responding to individuals with mental illness;
(2) procedures to identify and appropriately respond to incidents in which the
unique needs of individuals who have a mental illness are involved, to Federal first responders and tactical units;
(3) the application of evidence-based practices in criminal justice settings to better
address individuals with mental illnesses;
and
(4) recommendations on how the Department of Justice can expand and improve information sharing and dissemination of best
practices.
SEC. 910. EVIDENCE BASED PRACTICES.
Section 2991(c) of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C.
3797aa(c)) is amended—
(1) in paragraph (3), by striking ‘‘or’’ at the
end;
(2) by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph (6); and
(3) by inserting after paragraph (3), the following:
‘‘(4) propose interventions that have been
shown by empirical evidence to reduce recidivism;
‘‘(5) when appropriate, use validated assessment tools to target preliminarily qualified offenders with a moderate or high risk of
recidivism and a need for treatment and
services; or’’.
SEC. 911. TRANSPARENCY, PROGRAM ACCOUNTABILITY, AND ENHANCEMENT OF
LOCAL AUTHORITY.
(a) IN GENERAL.—Section 2991(a) of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of
1968 (42 U.S.C. 3797aa(a)) is amended—
(1) in paragraph (7)—
(A) in the heading, by striking ‘‘MENTAL
ILLNESS’’ and inserting ‘‘MENTAL ILLNESS;
MENTAL HEALTH DISORDER’’; and
(B) by striking ‘‘term ‘mental illness’
means’’ and inserting ‘‘terms ‘mental illness’
and ‘mental health disorder’ mean’’; and
(2) by striking paragraph (9) and inserting
the following:
‘‘(9) PRELIMINARILY QUALIFIED OFFENDER.—
‘‘(A) IN GENERAL.—The term ‘preliminarily
qualified offender’ means an adult or juvenile accused of an offense who—
‘‘(i)(I) previously or currently has been diagnosed by a qualified mental health professional as having a mental illness or co-occurring mental illness and substance abuse disorders;
‘‘(II) manifests obvious signs of mental illness or co-occurring mental illness and substance abuse disorders during arrest or confinement or before any court; or
‘‘(III) in the case of a veterans treatment
court provided under subsection (i), has been
diagnosed with, or manifests obvious signs
of, mental illness or a substance abuse disorder or co-occurring mental illness and substance abuse disorder;
‘‘(ii) has been unanimously approved for
participation in a program funded under this
section by, when appropriate—
‘‘(I) the relevant—
‘‘(aa) prosecuting attorney;
‘‘(bb) defense attorney;
‘‘(cc) probation or corrections official; and
‘‘(dd) judge; and
‘‘(II) a representative from the relevant
mental health agency described in subsection (b)(5)(B)(i);
‘‘(iii) has been determined, by each person
described in clause (ii) who is involved in approving the adult or juvenile for participation in a program funded under this section,
to not pose a risk of violence to any person
in the program, or the public, if selected to
participate in the program; and
‘‘(iv) has not been charged with or convicted of—
‘‘(I) any sex offense (as defined in section
111 of the Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act (42 U.S.C. 16911)) or any offense
relating to the sexual exploitation of children; or
‘‘(II) murder or assault with intent to commit murder.
‘‘(B) DETERMINATION.—In determining
whether to designate a defendant as a preliminarily qualified offender, the relevant
prosecuting attorney, defense attorney, probation or corrections official, judge, and
mental health or substance abuse agency
representative shall take into account—
‘‘(i) whether the participation of the defendant in the program would pose a substantial risk of violence to the community;
‘‘(ii) the criminal history of the defendant
and the nature and severity of the offense for
which the defendant is charged;
‘‘(iii) the views of any relevant victims to
the offense;
‘‘(iv) the extent to which the defendant
would benefit from participation in the program;
‘‘(v) the extent to which the community
would realize cost savings because of the defendant’s participation in the program; and
‘‘(vi) whether the defendant satisfies the
eligibility criteria for program participation
unanimously established by the relevant
prosecuting attorney, defense attorney, probation or corrections official, judge and mental health or substance abuse agency representative.’’.
(b) TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENT.—Section 2927(2) of the Omnibus Crime
Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42
U.S.C. 3797s–6(2)) is amended by striking
‘‘has the meaning given that term in section
2991(a).’’ and inserting ‘‘means an offense
that—
‘‘(A) does not have as an element the use,
attempted use, or threatened use of physical
force against the person or property of another; or
‘‘(B) is not a felony that by its nature involves a substantial risk that physical force
against the person or property of another
may be used in the course of committing the
offense.’’.
SEC. 912. GRANT ACCOUNTABILITY.
Section 2991 of the Omnibus Crime Control
and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 U.S.C. 3797aa)
is amended by inserting after subsection (k),
as so added by section 905, the following:
‘‘(l) ACCOUNTABILITY.—All grants awarded
by the Attorney General under this section
shall be subject to the following accountability provisions:
‘‘(1) AUDIT REQUIREMENT.—
‘‘(A) DEFINITION.—In this paragraph, the
term ‘unresolved audit finding’ means a finding in the final audit report of the Inspector
General of the Department of Justice that
the audited grantee has utilized grant funds
for an unauthorized expenditure or otherwise
unallowable cost that is not closed or resolved within 12 months from the date when
the final audit report is issued.
‘‘(B) AUDITS.—Beginning in the first fiscal
year beginning after the date of enactment
of this subsection, and in each fiscal year
thereafter, the Inspector General of the Department of Justice shall conduct audits of
recipients of grants under this section to
prevent waste, fraud, and abuse of funds by
grantees. The Inspector General shall determine the appropriate number of grantees to
be audited each year.
‘‘(C) MANDATORY EXCLUSION.—A recipient
of grant funds under this section that is
found to have an unresolved audit finding
shall not be eligible to receive grant funds
under this section during the first 2 fiscal
years beginning after the end of the 12-
month period described in subparagraph (A).
‘‘(D) PRIORITY.—In awarding grants under
this section, the Attorney General shall give
priority to eligible applicants that did not
have an unresolved audit finding during the
3 fiscal years before submitting an application for a grant under this section.
‘‘(E) REIMBURSEMENT.—If an entity is
awarded grant funds under this section during the 2-fiscal-year period during which the
entity is barred from receiving grants under
subparagraph (C), the Attorney General
shall—
‘‘(i) deposit an amount equal to the
amount of the grant funds that were improperly awarded to the grantee into the General
Fund of the Treasury; and
‘‘(ii) seek to recoup the costs of the repayment to the fund from the grant recipient
that was erroneously awarded grant funds.
‘‘(2) NONPROFIT ORGANIZATION REQUIREMENTS.—
‘‘(A) DEFINITION.—For purposes of this
paragraph and the grant programs under this
part, the term ‘nonprofit organization’
means an organization that is described in
section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code
of 1986 and is exempt from taxation under
section 501(a) of such Code.
‘‘(B) PROHIBITION.—The Attorney General
may not award a grant under this part to a
nonprofit organization that holds money in
offshore accounts for the purpose of avoiding
paying the tax described in section 511(a) of
the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
‘‘(C) DISCLOSURE.—Each nonprofit organization that is awarded a grant under this
section and uses the procedures prescribed in
regulations to create a rebuttable presumption of reasonableness for the compensation
of its officers, directors, trustees, and key
employees, shall disclose to the Attorney
General, in the application for the grant, the
process for determining such compensation,
including the independent persons involved
VerDate Sep 11 2014 01:19 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00041 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A09MR6.015 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
S1392 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 9, 2016
in reviewing and approving such compensation, the comparability data used, and contemporaneous substantiation of the deliberation and decision. Upon request, the Attorney General shall make the information disclosed under this subparagraph available for
public inspection.
‘‘(3) CONFERENCE EXPENDITURES.—
‘‘(A) LIMITATION.—No amounts made available to the Department of Justice under this
section may be used by the Attorney General, or by any individual or entity awarded
discretionary funds through a cooperative
agreement under this section, to host or support any expenditure for conferences that
uses more than $20,000 in funds made available by the Department of Justice, unless
the head of the relevant agency or department, provides prior written authorization
that the funds may be expended to host the
conference.
‘‘(B) WRITTEN APPROVAL.—Written approval under subparagraph (A) shall include
a written estimate of all costs associated
with the conference, including the cost of all
food, beverages, audio-visual equipment,
honoraria for speakers, and entertainment.
‘‘(C) REPORT.—The Deputy Attorney General shall submit an annual report to the
Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate
and the Committee on the Judiciary of the
House of Representatives on all conference
expenditures approved under this paragraph.
‘‘(4) ANNUAL CERTIFICATION.—Beginning in
the first fiscal year beginning after the date
of enactment of this subsection, the Attorney General shall submit, to the Committee
on the Judiciary and the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate and the Committee on the Judiciary and the Committee
on Appropriations of the House of Representatives, an annual certification—
‘‘(A) indicating whether—
‘‘(i) all audits issued by the Office of the
Inspector General under paragraph (1) have
been completed and reviewed by the appropriate Assistant Attorney General or Director;
‘‘(ii) all mandatory exclusions required
under paragraph (1)(C) have been issued; and
‘‘(iii) all reimbursements required under
paragraph (1)(E) have been made; and
‘‘(B) that includes a list of any grant recipients excluded under paragraph (1) from
the previous year.
‘‘(m) PREVENTING DUPLICATIVE GRANTS.—
‘‘(1) IN GENERAL.—Before the Attorney
General awards a grant to an applicant
under this section, the Attorney General
shall compare potential grant awards with
other grants awarded under this Act to determine if duplicate grant awards are awarded for the same purpose.
‘‘(2) REPORT.—If the Attorney General
awards duplicate grants to the same applicant for the same purpose the Attorney General shall submit to the Committee on the
Judiciary of the Senate and the Committee
on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives a report that includes—
‘‘(A) a list of all duplicate grants awarded,
including the total dollar amount of any duplicate grants awarded; and
‘‘(B) the reason the Attorney General
awarded the duplicate grants.’’.
SEC. 913. REAUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
Subsection (n) of section 2991 of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of
1968 (42 U.S.C. 3797aa), as redesignated by
section 903(a), is amended—
(1) in paragraph (1)—
(A) in subparagraph (B), by striking ‘‘and’’
at the end;
(B) in subparagraph (C), by striking the period and inserting ‘‘; and’’; and
(C) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(D) $18,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2016
through 2020.’’; and
(2) by adding at the end the following:
‘‘(3) LIMITATION.—Not more than 28 percent
of the funds authorized to be appropriated
under this section may be used for purposes
described in subsection (j) (relating to veterans).’’.
f
AUTHORITY FOR COMMITTEES TO
MEET
COMMITTEE ON ARMED SERVICES
Mr. VITTER. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the Committee on Armed Services be authorized to meet during the session of the
Senate on March 9, 2016, at 10 a.m.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
COMMITTEE ON ENVIRONMENT AND PUBLIC
WORKS
Mr. VITTER. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the Committee on Environment and Public
Works be authorized to meet during
the session of the Senate on March 9,
2016, at 9:30 a.m., in room SD–406 of the
Dirksen Senate Office Building, to conduct a hearing entitled ‘‘Cooperative
Federalism: State Perspectives on EPA
Regulatory Actions and the Role of
States as Co-Regulators.’’
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
COMMITTEE ON HEALTH, EDUCATION, LABOR,
AND PENSIONS
Mr. VITTER. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the Committee on Health, Education, Labor,
and Pensions be authorized to meet
during the session of the Senate on
March 9, 2016, at 10 a.m., in room SD–
106 of the Dirksen Senate Office Building.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
COMMITTEE ON INDIAN AFFAIRS
Mr. VITTER. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the Committee on Indian Affairs be authorized
to meet during the session of the Senate on March 9, 2016, in room SD–628 of
the Dirksen Senate Office Building, at
2:15 p.m., to conduct a hearing entitled
‘‘The President’s FY2017 Indian Country Budget.’’
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
Mr. VITTER. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the Committee on the Judiciary be authorized
to meet during the session of the Senate on March 9, 2016, at 9:30 a.m., in
room SD–226 of the Dirksen Senate Office Building, to conduct a hearing entitled ‘‘Oversight of the U.S. Department of Justice.’’
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
SUBCOMMITTEE ON ANTITRUST, COMPETITION
POLICY AND CONSUMER RIGHTS
Mr. VITTER. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the Committee on the Judiciary Subcommittee
on Antitrust, Competition Policy and
Consumer Rights, be authorized to
meet during the session of the Senate
on March 9, 2016, at 2 p.m., in room SD–
226 of the Dirksen Senate Office Building, to conduct a hearing entitled
‘‘Oversight of the Enforcement of the
Antitrust Laws.’’
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
SUBCOMMITTEE ON EMERGING THREATS AND
CAPABILITIES
Mr. VITTER. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and
Capabilities of the Committee on
Armed Services be authorized to meet
during the session of the Senate on
March 9, 2016, at 2:30 p.m.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
SUBCOMMITTEE ON STRATEGIC FORCES
Mr. VITTER. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the Subcommittee on Strategic Forces of the
Committee on Armed Services be authorized to meet during the session of
the Senate on March 9, 2016, at 2:30
p.m.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
f
PRIVILEGES OF THE FLOOR
Mr. MERKLEY. Mr. President, I ask
that my intern, Anastasiya Parvankin,
be conveyed the privileges of the floor
for the remainder of the day.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
f
NATIONAL ASBESTOS AWARENESS
WEEK
Mr. MCCONNELL. Mr. President, I
ask unanimous consent that the Judiciary Committee be discharged and the
Senate proceed to the immediate consideration of S. Res. 376.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
The clerk will report the resolution
by title.
The legislative clerk read as follows:
A resolution (S. Res. 376) designating the
first week of April 2016 as ‘‘National Asbestos Awareness Week.’’
There being no objection, the Senate
proceeded to consider the resolution.
Mr. MCCONNELL. Mr. President, I
ask unanimous consent that the resolution be agreed to, the preamble be
agreed to, and the motions to reconsider be considered made and laid upon
the table with no intervening action or
debate.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
The resolution (S. Res. 376) was
agreed to.
The preamble was agreed to.
(The resolution, with its preamble, is
printed in the RECORD of February 25,
2016, under ‘‘Submitted Resolutions.’’)
VerDate Sep 11 2014 01:19 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00042 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\A09MR6.015 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
March 9, 2016 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1393
SUPPORTING THE DESIGNATION
OF MARCH 2016, AS ‘‘NATIONAL
COLORECTAL CANCER AWARENESS MONTH’’
Mr. MCCONNELL. Mr. President, I
ask unanimous consent that the Senate proceed to the consideration of S.
Res. 395, submitted earlier today.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will report the resolution by
title.
The legislative clerk read as follows:
A resolution (S. Res. 395) supporting the
designation of March 2016, as ‘‘National
Colorectal Cancer Awareness Month.’’
There being no objection, the Senate
proceeded to consider the resolution.
Mr. MCCONNELL. Mr. President, I
ask unanimous consent that the resolution be agreed to, the preamble be
agreed to, and the motions to reconsider be considered made and laid upon
the table with no intervening action or
debate.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
The resolution (S. Res. 395) was
agreed to.
The preamble was agreed to.
(The resolution, with its preamble, is
printed in today’s RECORD under ‘‘Submitted Resolutions.’’)
f
ORDERS FOR THURSDAY, MARCH
10, 2016
Mr. MCCONNELL. Mr. President, I
ask unanimous consent that when the
Senate completes its business today, it
adjourn until 9:30 a.m., Thursday,
March 10; that following the prayer and
pledge, the morning hour be deemed
expired, the Journal of proceedings be
approved to date, and the time for the
two leaders be reserved for their use
later in the day; further, that following
leader remarks, the Senate be in a period of morning business until 11:15
a.m., with Senators permitted to speak
therein for up to 10 minutes each; further, that following morning business,
the Senate resume consideration of S.
524; further, that notwithstanding the
provisions of rule XXII, all postcloture
time on S. 524 expire at 11:30 a.m.; finally, that the time following morning
business until 11:30 a.m. be equally divided between the two managers or
their designees.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
f
ORDER FOR ADJOURNMENT
Mr. MCCONNELL. Mr. President, if
there is no further business to come before the Senate, I ask unanimous consent that it stand adjourned under the
previous order, following the remarks
of Senators INHOFE and SULLIVAN.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
The Senator from Oklahoma.
Mr. INHOFE. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that I be recognized for up to 15 minutes as in morning business.
The PRESIDING OFFICER (Mr.
PERDUE). Without objection, it is so ordered.
f
FILLING THE SUPREME COURT
VACANCY
Mr. INHOFE. Mr. President, I am rising now to respond to a statement that
was made by our good friend from Illinois a few minutes ago, to clarify. It is
kind of interesting that we look back
and we find that when the Republicans
had someone in the White House and
the Democrats were trying to block a
nomination, it was just the opposite as
it is today. In fact, at that time, the
Senators in the leadership of the
Democrats—Obama, Biden, Clinton,
Schumer, and Reid—all made the statement, a joint statement that the Senate does not have to confirm Presidential nominations and urged that the
Senate refuse to do so, especially in an
election year.
Now, it is just the opposite of what
the Senator said, but I don’t blame
them. I don’t blame any Democrat for
trying their best to get a nominee from
this President because, as a Democrat,
they are more liberal than Republicans
are, and they would like very much to
have a chance to change the balance of
the U.S. Supreme Court, which has
been consistent in recent years in objecting to some of the extremist left
programs. So I can’t blame them for
trying, but nonetheless that is not
going to work.
I applaud the leader. At the time the
death—the sad death—of Scalia took
place, he was in a position where we
were in recess and so he had to make a
decision and the decision was the right
decision.
Anyway, I wish to share a couple of
letters with you that came from my
State of Oklahoma.
I will give the names and addresses,
if anyone wants to check. This is what
real people—you get outside the beltway, get out of Washington, DC, and
get back to States such as Oklahoma,
these are the concerns they have.
I want to read the first one. This is
from a guy named Robert from Tulsa,
OK. It came right after the sad death of
Justice Scalia. He said:
Dear Senator Inhofe,
I have just learned of the death of Justice
Scalia. I should only be feeling sadness at
the death of this great patriot and man of
the law. I am terrified of what I am sure is
now already in the works, his replacement
by President Barack Obama.
The person who replaces Justice Scalia
will have the potential to change the balance
of power on the bench for decades and may
have the possibility to reshape the political
landscape immediately and unalterably.
I, therefore, beg you and all of your fellow
Senators to not vote to affirm any candidate
put forward by President Obama. This is an
election year and the people should be given
a chance to choose which direction this
country will go and not have it decided by
President Obama as he leaves the White
House.
Please, do not vote for any candidate offered by this administration.
Another letter just came from
Chickasha, OK, from Donald. He says:
Dear Senator Inhofe,
I have just received word of the death of
Supreme Court Justice Scalia. His death is a
loss for the conservative movement, but I
fear it also puts our country in peril.
With Scalia gone, President Obama will
certainly present a nominee for his seat. If it
is a justice that holds to Obama’s progressive ideals and agenda, it could mean grave
danger for our Constitution.
I urge you to hold fast and refuse to confirm ANY Obama appointee to the Court.
Hold out until he is out of office. I feel the
future of our nation depends on it.
That is from Donald of Chickasha,
OK.
Next is a letter from Matthew of
Claremore, OK. Claremore is one of the
towns where our famous Will Rogers
spent his childhood. Everyone has
heard of Will Rogers—a great guy. Matthew said:
Senator Inhofe,
I am contacting you in regards to the loss
of Justice Scalia and his replacement. Justice Scalia was a brilliant man and a true patriot. Unfortunately, I do not feel any appointee by the President would follow the
Constitution and serve with the same virtue
as Justice Scalia. I am asking that you and
the other members of the Senate do not confirm a new Justice until after the election,
when the newly elected President can make
the appointment. We have sent you to Washington to stop the agenda of the President
that runs contrary to the wishes of the country. Please stand on your principles and do
not allow the President to appoint another
Justice that may be detrimental to our freedoms for decades to come. Thank you.
That is Matthew from Claremore,
OK. Let me assure you, of the hundreds
of letters we have received, I have read
them. I have no intention of changing
the pattern that has been in existence
since 1888 and allow a President, during
an election year, to make such a nomination.
So I think we did the right thing. I
think it would have been inappropriate
to say we are going to have hearings,
knowing that we were not going to
confirm a nominee. I don’t think that
would be fair to the nominee.
So these are just a few examples of
the hundreds of letters and calls from
constituents that I have received, asking that the Senate wait to confirm the
next Supreme Court nominee until we
have a new President.
We have heard from our colleagues
and pundits on the other side—the
Democrats, the other side of the aisle—
that it is our constitutional duty to
confirm President Obama’s nominations.
The Constitution says, and it says
very clearly, that the President ‘‘. . .
shall nominate, and by and with the
Advice and Consent of the Senate, shall
appoint . . . Judges of the supreme
Court.’’
The Senate clearly has a role in this
process, and the Senate can either give
its consent or it can withhold its consent and completely fulfill its constitutional duties. So it doesn’t make any
difference. We have the latitude of
making a determination, and we are
VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:37 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00043 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.066 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
S1394 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 9, 2016
going to do it. It wasn’t long ago when
the Democrats were singing a different
tune when the Republican was in the
White House, and that would have been
President Bush at that time. Some of
the Democrats on the floor said that
the Senate does not have to confirm
Presidential nominations and urged
that the Senate refuse to do so, especially in an election year.
The Democrats were saying that, so
it is just the opposite of what they are
saying today. In fact, the leadership
who was saying that at the time was
none other than Senators Obama, he
was a Senator at that time; BIDEN, he
was a Senator at that time; Clinton,
she was a Senator at that time; and
Senators SCHUMER and REID. They all
made the same statement. They said
the Senate does not have to confirm
Presidential nominations and urged
that the Senate refuse to do so, especially in an election year.
Now, that is where there is a difference of opinion because actually the
last time it was done in an election
year was 1888. You have to go all the
way back to 1888—128 years before you
find a similar situation to the one we
are in today. That is the last time a vacancy arose during an election year
and was filled by the Senate from a
party on the opposite side of the President. That is the last time that happened, 1888, and we are not about to
change that now.
Furthermore, even if this were not
true, this President hasn’t worked with
Congress on much of anything. So why
should we work with him on this?
That is not the point. The point is,
we don’t have to do that, and when the
Democrats were in control of the Senate and the Republicans had the White
House, they made it very clear the
leadership said the Senate does not
have to confirm a Presidential nomination, and they urged us not to do it.
And so the tables are turned now.
Now why is this important? We have
seen time and again when President
Obama is not able to get his liberal
agenda through Congress, he has
turned to Executive action and to
agency rulemaking to implement priorities. These regulations are actually
making their way through our courts
and are either going to be heard by the
Supreme Court or have already been
heard by the Supreme Court.
President Obama’s Executive amnesty was stayed by the lower courts,
and the Supreme Court will decide this
term if that injunction will stand or
not.
What we are saying is this: The
President has a very liberal agenda on
almost every social issue, every fiscal
issue, every military issue. It is a very
liberal agenda. So when the President
can’t get things done through legislation, he then turns around and tries to
do it through regulation.
I will give an example. If you talk to
the American Farm Bureau right now,
they will tell you the greatest problem
farmers and ranchers have—I know
this because I am from the farm State
of Oklahoma—is not anything in the
Agriculture bill. It is the overregulation of the EPA. Of all the regulations
that are damaging to farmers and
ranchers in America, the one they single out as being the worst is the
WOTUS rule; that is, the waters of the
United States.
Historically, it has always been in
the jurisdiction of the States as to how
to control and manage the waters of
the United States, except in cases
where it is navigable waters. Well, we
understand that. We understand that is
where the Federal Government should
be involved. But 6 years ago there was
a lot of legislation and one bill in particular that was offered in the House
and the Senate that would take the
word ‘‘navigable’’ out. That being the
case, that would mean all the waters in
a jurisdiction would go from the States
to the Federal Government, and we
weren’t going to let that happen. But
this is what is going on right now.
Things they have tried to get passed
through legislation and haven’t been
able to do, they are trying to do
through regulation.
If the Supreme Court is split 4 to 4 in
these two cases I just mentioned, the
injunctions of the lower courts will
stand until the underlying issues are
fully litigated. That is what they are
waiting for right now. The Court has
said that until the litigation is cleared
up, we are not going to act on this rule.
Well, as you know, that is going to
take a long time for that to happen.
The Clean Power Plan is the other
one. You might remember—to give a
little background—that going back to
the year 2000, which is when all this
global warming started and the end of
the world was coming, they were introducing legislation at that time to have
cap and trade and regulate the emissions of CO2 throughout America.
When people realized how much that
would cost and the fact that the
science was not yet settled, it was defeated. Every time they brought it to
the Senate, it was defeated. I am talking about through legislation trying to
do a cap and trade in America.
One of the interesting things was
that the first Director of the EPA that
was appointed by this President was
Lisa Jackson. I asked her a question in
a hearing that was on the record and
live on TV. I said: If we were to pass either this legislation or cap and trade or
do it by regulation in the United
States, would that have the effect of
lowering the emissions of CO2 worldwide? She said: No, because this isn’t
where the problem is. The problem is in
China. The problem is in India. The
problem is in Mexico.
So we went through that whole
thing, and the President, when he came
into office, decided: Well, they are
never going to pass this by the elected
representatives of the people, so we
will do it by regulation. So he came
out with the Clean Power Plan.
The Clean Power Plan is what President Obama came up with, and it essentially does the same thing as legislation would do when it would perform
cap and trade for the States. We remember the trip to Paris. When he got
to Paris, he was unable to get anyone
to do anything.
The deal they came up with was kind
of humorous because China said: No,
we are going to continue our emissions
until 2025; at that time, we will start
lowering our emissions. They were not
going to do it, and they are not going
to do it. But nonetheless, that was the
Clean Power Plan that came up, and it
was essentially the same thing that
was killed by legislation.
The Clean Power Plan would cost
about $292 billion, and it mandates carbon dioxide cuts from the power sector
to meet the President’s standards.
President Obama said in Paris that we
are going to lower our CO2 emissions
between 26 and 28 percent by 2025. Now,
he never said how we would do that—
never. He never did say how we were
going to comply with that. But nonetheless, he was going to try to do that
and, obviously, that was something
that would not have worked.
These and other Executive actions
and regulations will have a big impact
on our people and our economy and
will all likely be decided by the Supreme Court. That is where I get back
to the Supreme Court. The Clean
Power Plan would then be decided.
Right now on the Clean Power Plan
there is a stay in the U.S. Supreme
Court on the Clean Power Plan until
all of the litigation that is pending
right now can be settled. That could be
a long time—certainly way past this
particular Presidency.
It is not just the Executive actions
he has taken but the moral direction of
our country too. Just last week, the
Supreme Court heard a case challenging the State of Texas on its new
abortion regulations that require that
clinics meet the standard of other outpatient surgical clinics and mandate
that abortion doctors have admitting
privileges at nearby hospitals. That is
the Supreme Court. That is the type of
thing you would see if the liberals
would have their way and if the Supreme Court would change its direction.
Many of these decisions are 5-to-4 decisions, and that is why I say this is an
important decision. It is the American
people who will bear the burden of
these decisions and, therefore, they
should have a say in who would fill
Justice Scalia’s vacancy. So this decision should be made by the next President. Let a new President decide who
should replace Justice Scalia. That is
exactly what is going to happen.
With that, I yield the floor.
I suggest the absence of a quorum.
The PRESIDING OFFICER. The
clerk will call the roll.
The senior assistant legislative clerk
proceeded to call the roll.
Mr. SULLIVAN. Mr. President, I ask
unanimous consent that the order for
the quorum call be rescinded.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 03:04 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00044 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.067 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
March 9, 2016 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE S1395
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Without
objection, it is so ordered.
f
AMERICAN LEADERSHIP
Mr. SULLIVAN. Mr. President, I
know today we have been focusing on a
really important bill, the CARA bill,
which has been led by Senator
PORTMAN, Senator AYOTTE, and many
others. It is a very important bill for
our country, for States like Alaska
that are seeing this explosion of opioid
use, heroin use, and drug addiction
that is impacting so many families. I
had the opportunity to talk about this,
when I was home in Alaska last week
down in Juneau, in front of our State
legislature.
This legislation is showing bipartisan
work, which is very important to the
country and very important to States
like Alaska. I am certainly proud to be
a cosponsor of that bill. We are going
to continue to try to get that over the
goal line.
I think it is important to focus on
issues not only domestically, of course,
but issues beyond our borders as well.
What I want to talk about in terms of
these kinds of issues this afternoon is
the issue of American leadership in the
world today.
A lot of us in the Senate have experience in foreign policy and national security issues. There have been Members who have served in the State Department, decades in the military—the
Presiding Officer has a lot of experience in international business—and so
we have a fair amount of experience
here. Certainly, it is part of our responsibilities under the Constitution, as
Senators, to be very focused on these
issues—these important issues of national security, of foreign policy. Attending hearings, codels, and meetings
with foreign leaders are all part of our
responsibilities.
One thing is very clear. Foreign policy and national security issues are almost always messy, complicated, never
really have easy solutions, and are
often very opaque in terms of what is
happening in the world and how it impacts the United States. We recognize
that. That is usually the case. But
sometimes in the world of foreign policy, sometimes in the world of national
security, there are moments of clarity
when big issues come into focus. It
doesn’t happen often. It is rare. But
when it happens, you know it. When it
happens, you sense it.
I was recently part of a bipartisan
congressional delegation led by one of
the foremost experts on foreign policy
and national security in the Senate,
Senator JOHN MCCAIN. We all went to
the Munich Security Conference in Munich, Germany. For over 50 years, this
has been where leaders have come together—Americans, certainly, Prime
Ministers, Foreign Ministers, Defense
Ministers, international affairs experts—to discuss national security and
foreign policy issues, usually as it relates to the Atlantic partnership—
NATO, the EU.
My experience there led to one of
these clarifying moments, and I think I
am speaking for many of the people
who were at Munich about 3 weeks ago.
Here is the clarifying moment: The
United States is withdrawing from its
traditional leadership role in the
world. Our allies know it, they feel it,
and they are desperately worried about
it.
In meeting after meeting, in speech
after speech, if you were in Munich a
month ago, listening, paying attention,
discussing the state of the world’s security with our allies, you heard it.
You heard it. Sometimes it was subtle,
sometimes it was direct, and, occasionally, it was even pleading—pleading
from our allies, pleading for American
leadership in the world again. We saw
that.
One of the meetings we had was with
an important leader of an important
country in Europe. The Presiding Officer and I were there. At the end of the
meeting, this leader was asked: What
can the United States do to help your
country in terms of security—aid, military cooperation? What can we do?
This leader looked at a group of several
Senators, bipartisan, and said: The
United States has to lead in the world
again. You are not leading, and the
world is becoming a much more dangerous place because of the lack of
American leadership. Whoever the next
leader of your great country is, please
tell that person that the United States
has to lead again.
Think about that. That was the message. That was the message from Munich. Our friends are worried. They
have certainly lost confidence in us,
and our adversaries are taking advantage of the vacuum that we have left
all around the world. That was the
message of Munich, and anyone who
went there heard it.
Now, I know some of my colleagues
might be thinking: Well, this is a Republican Senator on the floor of the
Senate, criticizing the Obama administration. That is probably a partisan
criticism. But there were many people
at Munich. There were Republicans and
Democrats at Munich. Just a perusal of
newspaper articles from those who
went—and some who weren’t there—
shows that all are writing about the
same issue—that one of the principal
foreign policy issues facing the world,
facing the United States right now, is
what the lack of U.S. leadership globally is doing to the national security of
our country and to that of our allies.
Let me just provide a few examples.
Senator Joe Lieberman, who graced
this body with his knowledge and expertise and wisdom for many, many
years—a Democrat—was in Munich.
Not too long after coming back, he
wrote in the Washington Post:
The world has never seemed as dangerous
and leaderless as it does now. Only the extremists and bullies act badly, and therefore
have seized the initiative.
It’s a moment in history that invokes the
haunting words of W.B. Yeats: ‘‘The best
lack all conviction, while the worst are full
of passionate intensity.’’
That was Senator Lieberman, who
was with us in Munich just a couple of
weeks ago.
Former Under Secretary of State
Nicholas Burns, who has worked for
Democrats and Republicans, was also
there. I served under Secretary of
State Condoleezza Rice with Under
Secretary Burns—a great career foreign service officer. He also stated:
‘‘We are being humiliated. We’ve lost
our strategic foothold’’—he is talking
about the Middle East—‘‘and we’ve abdicated our leadership.’’ That is not a
Republican partisan saying that.
GEN John Abizaid—in my view one
of the premier military leaders our
country has seen in a generation,
whom I had the honor of serving with
as a marine major—recently stated:
‘‘Without American leadership, we’re
not going to move in a direction that’s
going to produce effective results.’’
There was another recent article in
the Washington Post by another observer, an expert on foreign policy
issues, Fred Hiatt, who wrote about
what he saw at Munich. What he stated
was that the endless negotiation by our
Secretary of State ‘‘that perpetually,
and falsely, holds out the prospect of
imminent progress’’ on so many different issues ends up ‘‘providing cover’’
and ‘‘is an excuse for inaction,’’ an
‘‘anesthetic,’’ he said, where the Congress and the American people don’t
even have to feel about focusing on
these issues, what is going on in the
Middle East or the South China Sea or
North Korea or the Korean Peninsula
because we have endless diplomacy
that covers it.
Finally, another participant in Munich, former Senator Bill Cohen, who
worked as the Secretary of Defense for
President Clinton, stated: ‘‘We no
longer seem to know what our role
should be in the new century.’’
He was interviewed on the radio a
couple of weeks ago right after Munich:
Are we going to lead from behind? The
truth is that President Putin has been bombing and the United States has been
dithering.
That is former Secretary of Defense
Bill Cohen, former U.S. Senator Bill
Cohen.
It is very clear, whether you are
Democratic or Republican, that anyone
who spent time at the Munich security
conference a few weeks ago came away
with a similar conclusion: Our allies
are extremely worried about what is
clearly happening—the withdrawal of
U.S. leadership from the world. They
are seeing it, and we are seeing it in almost every region of the world. It is
leaving a vacuum. Other countries that
don’t share our interests and don’t
share our values are filling that vacuum. We know the list. We have been debating it on this floor. Russia, certainly. Whether it is in the Middle
East, Syria, Ukraine, the Arctic, Iran,
the world’s largest state sponsor of terrorism—our diplomats and Secretary of
VerDate Sep 11 2014 01:19 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00045 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.069 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE
S1396 CONGRESSIONAL RECORD — SENATE March 9, 2016
State seem to spend more time with
their diplomats and their Foreign Minister than almost any other country in
the world—China and the South China
Sea.
In the face of these challenges, we
are also starting to see something that
is truly alarming. The postwar structure, the national security structure of
the world that the United States was
instrumental in building, is beginning
to crumble in different parts of the
world.
So what should we do? What can we
do? I think there is a lot we can do. We
can certainly bolster the American-led
order that was established after World
War II. It certainly does not have to
crumble. This is what our colleague
Senator MCCAIN laid out in his outstanding speech in Munich. He talked
about how this is one of our most important inheritances, this world order,
this American-led order, and how we
need to focus on it—not with speeches
but with action.
What else can we do? We can look at
the changing landscape of the world
and see if we need to devise new political structures that address new challenges in places such as the Middle
East, where borders seem to be being
erased on a daily basis by terrorist
groups like ISIS. This is something
General Abizaid has written about recently.
Both of these alternatives require
American leadership. They are not
going to happen without the United
States in the lead. If you went to Munich, you realize their allies want us to
lead.
What can we do in the Senate? Well,
we can certainly press for a more assertive and leading role for the United
States of America from this body. The
Constitution gives the U.S. Senate significant power in national security
matters and foreign affairs, and we
should be using that. We are using
that.
Under the new leadership of the Senate, we have been moving forward in
many areas of foreign policy and national security. There are the North
Korea sanctions that were passed by
this body 2 weeks ago, and now the
world is following our lead on that.
Senators GARDNER and CORKER did an
outstanding job in that regard. There
is the bipartisan approach to Ukraine
that we see on the Armed Services
Committee. Every Member of that
body, Democratic and Republican,
thinks we should be doing more to help
the Ukrainians defend themselves
against Russian aggression. Afghanistan, the same thing—bolstering the
need for troops there to guard America’s security. The President has seemingly wanted to take all our troops out
of there, as he wanted to do in Iraq, but
again a bipartisan group of Senators
have been questioning that strategy on
a daily basis. In the South China Sea,
we have been encouraging the administration to do what we have been doing
for 70 years—conducting freedom of
navigation operations to keep the sealanes of the world open. These are all
things the Senate has been doing—in
essence, trying to give this administration backbone, to assert the leadership
we know is so important to our security and the security of the world.
But there is another thing, another
option that might be out there. We can
ignore the problem of what is happening in the world.
I hate to say this, but if you saw Secretary of State Kerry’s speech in Munich, certainly compared to Senator
MCCAIN’s keynote address, what the
Secretary of State seemed to be doing
was that fourth option. He seemed to
be saying: Hey, things aren’t going
that badly. Things in Syria aren’t that
bad.
He cautioned against pessimism and
said that we have good reasons to be
optimistic about what is happening. He
talked about how fewer people are
dying in conflict today than ever before. You literally heard a gasp in the
audience in Munich when that was
stated. That is not true.
What this does when you have the
Secretary of State making these kinds
of statements at important security
conferences with all our allies, it further undermines the credibility of the
United States in terms of foreign policy and national security.
We need to lead again. Our allies
want us to. Most importantly, I believe
the American people want us to.
Why? Why shouldn’t we just withdraw from the world and let everything
catch on fire? Bring the troops home
and have the two oceans protect us—
the Atlantic and Pacific.
We need to lead, and I believe the
American people want the United
States to lead because they know that
when the United States leads in the
world, it is a safer place abroad and it
is a safer place at home. They know
what Senator Lieberman said recently
in his op-ed after Munich: ‘‘The absence of American leadership has certainly not caused all the instability,
but it has encouraged and exacerbated
it.’’ The American people also know
that when there is a lack of U.S. leadership in the world, it not only turns to
undermining our national security interests, but it turns to humiliation for
our own citizens. Just think of the
photos that we saw recently of U.S.
sailors on their knees at Iranian gunpoint with their hands raised in surrender and what that does in terms of
how Americans are thinking about our
role in the world, the security of the
world, and what is happening with regard to U.S. leadership. We have to
change these policies of leading from
behind.
I will conclude by mentioning in
terms of this lack of U.S. leadership
what I fear the most. I started by saying that we were at a conference where
our allies directly, indirectly were asking for American leadership once
again. But what I fear the most is the
day that a group of bipartisan Senators
goes to another conference like Munich
or the Shangri-la Dialogue and we
don’t hear from our allies, we don’t
hear them asking for us to lead once
again, because such silence will truly
be dangerous indeed because that is
when we will know that our traditional
allies have given up on the United
States; that is when we will know that
our traditional allies have lost faith in
America and have begun the process of
making accommodations with our adversaries. We in the Senate must do all
in our power to make sure that situation where we lose our allies, where
they don’t ask for our leadership, does
not happen.
I yield the floor.
f
ADJOURNMENT UNTIL 9:30 A.M.
TOMORROW
The PRESIDING OFFICER. Under
the previous order, the Senate stands
adjourned until 9:30 a.m. tomorrow
morning.
Thereupon, the Senate, at 6:40 p.m.,
adjourned until Thursday, March 10,
2016, at 9:30 a.m.
VerDate Sep 11 2014 01:19 Mar 10, 2016 Jkt 059060 PO 00000 Frm 00046 Fmt 4637 Sfmt 0634 E:\CR\FM\G09MR6.070 S09MRPT1
smartinez on DSK4VPTVN1PROD with SENATE